महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, मंब ई आशण
राज्यातील सस्ं था यांच्या संयक् त शिद्यमाने
चालशिण्यात येणाऱ्या “शिका ि कमिा” या
उपक्रमाचे सिकव ष धोरण शनशित करणेबाबत.
महाराष्ट्र िासन
उच्च ि तंत्र शिक्षण शिभाग
िासन शनणवय क्र. मान्यता-2023/(प्र.क्र.81/23)/तांशि-5
मादाम कामा रोड, ह तात्मा राजग रू चौक,
मंत्रालय शिस्तार भिन, मंब ई-400 032,
शदनांक : - 14 ज लै, 2023.
िाचा :-
1. उच्च ि तंत्र शिक्षण शिभाग,िासन शनणवय क्र.टीईडी-2013/(10/13)/तांशि-5,शद.23.04.2013
2. संचालक, तंत्रशिक्षण सचं लनालय,महाराष्ट्र राज्य याचं े पत्र क्र.10/एनजीपी/शिका ि कमिा/ 2023 /564,
शद.11.07.2023.
प्रस्तािना :-
मा.पंतप्रधान, भारत सरकार यांच्या राष्ट्रीय कौिल्य शिकास उपक्रमातं गवत आशण उद्योगधंदयातील क िल
मन ष्ट्यबळाची िाढती मागणी शिचारात घेऊन महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, मंब ई यानं ी उद्योगजगतातील तज्ाचं े
मदतीने उद्योगधंदयािी संबशंधत अल्पम दतीच े िासनमान्य पदशिका अभ्यासक्रमांबाबत धोरण/कायवपध्दती शनशित
के लेली आहे.
2. िासनाने संदभाशधन क्र.1 िरील िासन शनणवयान्िये “शिका ि कमिा” योजना राबशिण्यास मान्यता शदलेली
आहे. “शिका ि कमिा ” योजनेअंतगवत अभ्यासक्रमांम ळे शिद्यार्थ्यांना मोठया प्रमाणात रोजगाराच्या सधं ी उपलब्ध
होतील. त्याम ळे उद्योग जगताला क िल मन ष्ट्यबळ शमळण्यास मदत होईल. तसेच सदर अभ्यासक्रम उद्योग
क्षेत्राकरीता उपयक् त असल्याने शिद्यार्थ्यामध्ये तांशत्रक कौिल्य शिकसीत होण्यास मदत होईल. ककबह ना गरीब
शिद्यार्थ्यांकरीता या योजनेचा जास्तीतजास्त फायदा होऊन ग्रामीण भागातील शिद्यार्थ्यांना शिक्षणाबरोबरच
रोजगाराचाही पयाय उपलब्ध होण्यास मदत होईल.
3. त्यादृष्ट्टीने “शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमाची उपयक् तता शिचारात घेता राज्यातील इच्छूक संस्थांना सदर
उपक्रमांमध्ये सहभागी होता याि े याकशरता महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, मंब ई यांनी सदर धोरणास जाहीर
प्रशसध्दी देि न राज्यातील इच्छूक संस्था, उद्योगसम ह आशण संबशंधत तज् यांचेकडून प्राप्त शिशिध व्यिहायव स चनाचं ा
समाििे करुन सिकव ष धोरण तयार के लेल े आहे. संचालक , तंत्रशिक्षण सचं ालनालय यांनी संदभाशधन पत्रान्िये
सादर के लेल्या सदर “शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमाच े सिकव ष धोरणास मान्यता देण्याची बाब िासनाच्या
शिचाराधीन होती.
िासन शनणवय :-
1. “शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमाची उपयक् तता शिचारात घेता राज्यातील इच्छूक संस्थांना सदर उपक्रमामध्य े
सहभागी होता याि े याकशरता सोबतच्या जोडपत्र- अ मधील “शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमाच े सिकव ष धोरणास
मान्यता देण्यात येत आहे.
2. “शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमाअंतगवत उपरोक्त धोरणान सार पात्र संस्थांच्या शनिडीची प्रशक्रया महाराष्ट्र
राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळामाफव त राबशिण्यात येईल ि पात्र सस्ं थांबाबतचा प्रस्ताि शिफारिींसह अंशतम मान्यतेसाठी
िासनास सादर करण्यात येईल. िासनामाफव त संस्थेची शनिड झाल्यानंतर तेथील अभ्यासक्रम ठरशिणे, संलग्नता
फी, पशरक्षा फी ठरशिणे इ. बाबींबाबत महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळाने त्याचं े स्तरािरुन कके डशमक सशमती ि
शनयामक मंडळ स्तरािरुन कायविाही करािी.
िासन शनणवय क्रमांकः मान्यता-2023/(प्र.क्र.81/23)/तांशि-5
3. महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, संबशंधत संस्था ि सदर योजनेत सहभागी होणारे उद्योगसमूह यानं ा
“शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमाअंतगवत अभ्यासक्रम राबशिताना खालील नमूद अटी ि िती लागू राहतील.
1. महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ अशधशनयम, 1997 मधील कलम 25 न सार सदर योजनेअंतगवत संस्थचे े
संलग्ग्नकरण करण्यात याि.े
2. शिद्यार्थ्यांची नोंदणी िषातून दोन िळे ा के ली जाईल.
3. महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, मंब ई द्वारा प्रिशेित शिद्यार्थ्यांना संलग्नता प्रदान करण्यासाठी संबशंधत
संस्थेस कें द्रशनहाय प्रििे देण्यात आलल्े या शिद्यार्थ्यांची शनिड यादी मंडळाच्या शिभागीय कायालयास
शिशहत कालािधीत सादर करणे आिश्यक राहील.
4. “शिका ि कमिा” या उपक्रमांतगवत राबशिण्यात येणारे सि व अभ्यासक्रम अशखल भारतीय तंत्रशिक्षण
पशरषदेच्या अखत्यारीबाहेरील अभ्यासक्रम असल्याने या अभ्यासक्रमाचे प्रती शिद्याथी शिक्षणि ल्क महाराष्ट्र
राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ शनधारीत करेल त्याप्रमाणे संबशंधत उद्योगसमूहाने अदा कराि.े
5. सदर उपक्रमांतगवत संबशं धत संस्थेस सहभागी होणाऱ्या प्रत्येक उद्योगसमूहासाठी महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण
मंडळाकडून स्ितंत्र संलग्नता प्राप्त करािी लागेल.
6. “शिका ि कमिा” उपक्रम उद्योगक्षत्रे ाला लाभणारे क िल मन ष्ट्यबळ तयार करण्यासाठी ि शिद्यार्थ्यांची
रोजगाराशभम खता (Employability) िाढशिण्याच्या दृष्ट्टीने तयार करण्यात आला असल्याम ळे त्यासाठी
कोणतीही प्रििे संख्या शनशित करता येणार नाही. अभ्यासक्रमासाठी प्रिशेित शिद्याथी संख्या सहभागी
उद्योगसमूहांच्या क्षमतेिर अिलंबनू राहील.
7. शिद्यार्थ्यांची लेखी परीक्षा घेताना औद्योशगक आस्थापनाचं ी गरज शिचारात घेिून सि व शिद्याथी एकािळे ी
परीक्षसे उपग्स्थत राहणे िक्य नसल्यास शिद्यार्थ्यांची उपलब्धता शिचारात घेऊन सदर परीक्षा कमाल दोन
गटात शिभागून देता येईल. तथाशप संस्थेला परीक्षेस बसणाऱ्या शिद्यार्थ्यांची संख्या शिशहत म दतीत कळिािी
लागेल. या योजनेसाठी मंडळामाफव त स्ितंत्र परीक्षा ि ल्क ठरशिले जाईल.
8. संबशं धत संस्था ही महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळाकडून शनशित के लल्े या सधै ांशतक ि प्रात्यशक्षक (Theory
ि Practical) अभ्यासक्रमाप्रमाणे िैक्षशणक िळे ापत्रक परीक्षा घेण्याची कायविाही करेल.
9. “शिका ि कमिा” या संपणू व सकं ल्पनेचा आढािा सचं ालक, महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, मंब ई
यांच्याकडून दर दोन िषांनी घेण्यात येईल.
10.सदर अभ्यासक्रमासाठी शिद्यार्थ्यांचे नोंदणी ि ल्क, परीक्षा ि ल्क महराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ शनधारीत
करील. मंडळाने शनधारीत के ल्यान सार शिद्यार्थ्यांच े शिक्षण ि ल्क ि शिद्यार्थ्यांना द्याियाचे शिद्यािते न अदा
करण्याची जबाबदारी सहभागी उद्योजकांची राहील.
11.सदर योजना राबशिण्यासंदभातील सि व शित्तीय भार, संस्था आशण उद्योग समूह यानं ी एकशत्रत येऊन
सोसाियाचा असल्याम ळे या संदभात िासनाकडून कोणतेही अन दान उपलब्ध के ले जाणार नाही.
12.उक्त प्रयोजनासाठी सदरहू संस्थेच ेकायवक्षेत्र महाराष्ट्र राज्यापर ते शसमीत राहील.
13.िैक्षशणक कायद्यातील संबशं धत तरतूदींच ेतंतोतंत पालन करण्याची जबाबदारी संस्थेची राहील.
14.सि व अभ्यास कें द्रािर महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळाच्या शनयमान सार िैक्षशणक म ल्यांकन करुन
शिक्षणाचा दजा शटकशिण्यात येईल.
15.“शिका ि कमिा” या उपकमांतगवत प्रशिक्षण घेणाऱ्या प्रशिक्षणाथींना कप्रेंटीसशिप कक्ट 1961 च्या
कायद्यान सार कमाल कालािधी 4 िषांपयंत कप्रटें ीस म्हणनू संबोधण्यात याि े ि या कालािधीत प्रिशेित
शिद्यार्थ्यांना शिद्यािते न देण्याची सिस्व िी जबाबदारी सहभागी उद्योग समूहाची राहील.
पृष्ट्ठ 3 पैकी 2
िासन शनणवय क्रमांकः मान्यता-2023/(प्र.क्र.81/23)/तांशि-5
16.शिशिध िासकीय तंत्रशनके तने, अशभयांशत्रकी महाशिद्यालये यांचके डून िगव खोल्या, प्रयोगिाळा, कायविाळा
ि इतर सोयी उपलब्धतेन सार पर शिण्यात आल्यास त्यासाठी खचापोटीची रक्कम िासनाच्या धोरणान सार
संबशं धत संस्थेस अदा करािी लागेल.
17.प्रशिक्षणाथींचा शिमा उतरशिण्याची ि िद्यै कीय देखभालीची सिस्व िी जबाबदारी सहभागी उद्योगसमूहाची
राहील.
18.“शिका ि कमिा” उपक्रमांतगवत प्रस्ताशित अभ्यासक्रमाकं रीता िैक्षशणक साशहत्य आिश्यकतेन सार मराठी-
इंग्रजी शद्वभाषेमध्ये संचालक, महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, मंब ई आशण संबशंधत संस्था यानं ी उपलब्ध
करुन द्याि.े
19.उपरोक्त अटी ि ितीन सार महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, संबशंधत सस्ं था ि सहभागी उद्योगसमूहाने
आपसात करार करुन अभ्यासक्रम राबशिण्याची कायविाही करािी.
सदर िासन शनणवय, महाराष्ट्र िासनाच्या www.maharashtra.gov.in या सकं े तस्थळािर उपलब्ध करुन
देण्यात आला असनू त्याचा सकं े ताकं 202307141811522008 असा आहे. हा आदेि शडजीटल स्िाक्षरीने
साक्षांशकत करुन काढण्यात येत आहे.
महाराष्ट्राचे राज्यपाल यांच्या आदेिान सार ि नािाने,
( अशनता तम् म लिार )
कायासन अशधकारी, महाराष्ट्र िासन.
प्रशत:-
1. मा.मंत्री (उच्च ि तंत्र शिक्षण) यांचे खाजगी सशचि, मंत्रालय, मंब ई.
2. प्रधान सशचि (उच्च ि तंत्र शिक्षण) यांच ेस्िीय सहाययक, मंत्रालय, मंब ई.
3. संचालक, तंत्रशिक्षण संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंब ई.
4. संचालक, महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळ, िांद्रा (पिू )व, मंब ई.
5. सि वप्राचायव, िासकीय तंत्रशनके तने (महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळामाफव त).
6. सि वप्राचायव, िासकीय अशभयांशत्रकी महाशिद्यालये (महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रशिक्षण मंडळामाफव त).
7. शनिड नस्ती (तांशि-5).
पृष्ट्ठ 3 पैकी 3
शासन ननर्णय क्र.मान्यता-2023/(प्र.क्र.81/23), नि.14.07.2023 सोबतच े
जोडपत्र - अ
Learn while Earn Scheme: Policy document
(Revised)
Preamble:
In accordance with the Prime Ministers National Skill Development Mission and to cater
increasing demand of skilled human resources in the Industry, MSBTE has developed
curriculum for Industry Oriented skilled based short term State Government approved
diploma courses with help of Industry experts. There is also nationwide problem of huge
dropouts after matriculation due to socio economic conditions in the community, lack of
awareness due to limited access to information and low accessibility of technical education in
rural areas and small towns. Due to this gross enrolment ratio is also less. To overcome these
problems, MSBTE has developed a unique and innovative scheme namely, Learn while Earn
Scheme. Under this scheme less privileged eligible youths shall get an opportunity to pursue
their education while they work.
Objective:
1. Provide opportunity to students from poor family to learn while earn
2. Reduce shortage of skilled manpower faced by Industry to some extent
3. Provide skilled manpower to industry implementing the scheme
4. Facilitate government to achieve target of National Skill Development program of
Government of India
5. Provide avenues for upgradation of skills to employees in Industry
Salient Features:
1. Direct Industry involvement in technical education.
2. Facility of On Job Training
3. Selected students shall avail fees and/or stipend, facilities from Industry.
1. Application Procedure:
 The Institute has to make a prescribed application in prescribed format. After submission
of a prescribed application form, the Institute will have to pay a Rs. 25,000/ per course
per Industry (courses with nomenclature other than AICTE) in form of demand draft from
nationalised bank in favour of Secretary, MSBTE, Mumbai within stipulated time limit as
a processing fee.
 The received applications will be evaluated as per essential and evaluation criteria as
mentioned in Section 2. The local enquiry committee appointed by MSBTE will visit the
institute for physical verification and correctness of the information submitted in the
application. The institute will have to produce the necessary documents in support of it to
the local enquiry committee. The Applicant who secures 75 or more marks out of 100 in
the Evaluation Criteria shall only be considered for further process. The Applicant who
secures less than 75 marks in the Evaluation Criteria will be rejected. The committee
report will be put up in Governing Board meeting for recommendation. After
recommendation of Governing Board, the proposal will be submitted to Government of
Maharashtra for its approval.
 The applicant shall be allowed for Learn while Earn Scheme after the approval received
from Government of Maharashtra and accordingly it will be implemented by the institute.
2. Criteria for grant of Learn while Earn Scheme:
2.1 Essential Criteria:
The Applicant should fulfil all the following criteria independently, as on the date of
submission of Proposal.
Sr.
Criteria Documents to be submitted
No.
1 The Applicant or its sister concern owned  Copy of Certificate of
by the same management should be a Incorporation issued by Registrar
registered company under the Indian of Companies.
Companies Act, 1956 or the Indian
Companies Act, 2013 or Limited Liability  In case of Trust/ Society, Valid
Partnership Firm registered under Limited Registration of respective
Liability Partnership Firm Act 2008 or any Government Departments, Or
amendments thereafter or a Society/ Trust proof of application for
registered under Registration Act, 1860 or revalidation
the Act, 1882, or Partnership Firm
registered under Partnership Act 1932 and  PAN/TAN copy as documentary
or any other applicable statute conforming proof
to the rules laid down by the concerned
State Government, and should be in
 GST Registration Certificate
existence for at least last 5 years, as on
Proposal submission date
and
should have registered office in
Maharashtra
and
Registered with the GST Authorities
2 Applicant should have experience of MoU/ Contract Copy and Work order
establishing / operating and maintenance for Learn while Earn Centre
of minimum 5 Learn while Earn Centre
establishment/operation and any
or similar recognized On Job Training
proof or certification from
scheme (other than Apprenticeship
Schemes) centres in last Five years of appropriate authority confirming
operations operation.
And
Applicant should have educational
experiences - tie up (MoU) to conduct /
implement educational programs of any
University, Sector Skill Council, or
recognized Board across India, with at
least two Non-AICTE courses in each
center.
3 The Applicant should have experience of Self-declaration and/or related
providing training to at least 500 trainees documents
(cumulative) under Learn while Earn
Scheme or relevant scheme like National
Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme
(NAPS), National Apprenticeship
Training Scheme (NATS), National
Employability Enhancement Mission
(NEEM), National Skill Development
Corporation (NSDC) etc.in last five years
of operations.
4 The Applicant should have experience of Self-declaration/Placement and/or
providing placement to at least 200 related documents like udyam
trainees (cumulative) under Learn while registration for self-employment, etc.
Earn Scheme or any relevant scheme like
NAPS, NATS, NEEM & NSDC etc in last
five years of operations.
5 The Applicant should have average annual CA Certificate depicting turnover of
turnover of minimum INR 2 Crore from last 3 financial years from Learn while
Learn while Earn Scheme or any relevant Earn Scheme
scheme like NAPS, NATS, NEEM &
NSDC etc during last 3 financial years.
6 The Applicant should have minimum 20 Certificate on Letter head of the
Faculty/Staff on contract or on permanent organization duly signed by the HR
basis. head of the organization along with the
list of work force with name,
designation, date of joining,
qualification, experience, nature of
appointment-contractual/permanent,
etc.
7 Applicant should have signed minimum MoU/ Contract Copy for Learn while
10 MOU with Industry for Learn while Earn Scheme and any proof or
Earn Scheme or any relevant scheme like certification from appropriate authority
NAPS, NATS, NEEM & NSDC etc in last
Five years of operations. Industry shall be confirming operation.
/ have
a) At least 10 years old.
b) Turnover not less that INR 20
crores.
c) At least 50 employees on role of
the Industry.
d) A conference / Seminar hall of at
least 50 m2 area and having
suitable facility for on job training.
8 The Applicant shall not be under a Declaration by authorized signatory of
declaration of ineligibility / banned / the Applicant
blacklisted by any State or Central
Government / any other Government
institutions in India for any reason as on
last date of submission of the proposal.
2.2 Evaluation Criteria
The Applicant who secures 75 or more marks out of 100 in the Evaluation Criteria shall only
be considered for further process. The Applicant who secures less than 75 marks in the
Evaluation Criteria will be rejected.
Sr. Maximum
Evaluation Criteria Marks
No. Marks
1 Applicant should have experience of establishing / 20
operating and maintenance of minimum 5 Learn while Earn
Centres in last Five years of operations with at least two
Non-AICTE courses in each centre.
More than 5 and up to 10 15
More than 10 20
2 The Applicant should have experience of providing training 20
to at least 500 trainees (cumulative) under Learn while Earn
Scheme or any relevant scheme like NAPS, NATS, NEEM
& NSDC etc in last five years of operations.
More than 500 and up to 1000 trainees 15
More than 1000 20
3 The Applicant should have experience of providing training 15
and placement to at least 200 trainees (cumulative) under
Learn while Earn Scheme or any relevant scheme like
NAPS, NATS, NEEM & NSDC etc in last five years of
operations.
More than 200 and up to 400 trainees 10
More than 400 15
4 The Applicant should have average turnover of minimum 15
INR 2 Crore from Learn while Earn Scheme or any
relevant scheme like NAPS, NATS, NEEM & NSDC etc
during last 3 financial years.
More than 2 crore and up to 4 crore 10
More than 4 crore 15
5 The Applicant should have minimum 20 Faculty/Staff on 15
contract or on permanent basis.
More than 20 and up to 40 10
More than 40 15
6 Applicant should have signed minimum 10 MOU with 15
Industry for Learn while Earn Scheme or any relevant
scheme like NAPS, NATS, NEEM & NSDC etc in last
Five years of operations. Industry shall be / have
a) At least 10 years old.
b) Turnover not less that INR 20 crores.
c) At least 50 employees on role of the Industry.
d) A conference / Seminar hall of at least 50 m2 area
and having suitable facility for on job training.
More than 10 and up to 20 10
More than 20 15
Total 100
3. Roles and Responsibilities:
Industry:
1. To select eligible candidates for Learn while Earn Scheme
2. To provide on job training to students of the applicant under Learn while Earn Scheme
3. To provide required infrastructure/space to conduct the classroom training within Industry
premises. Theory portion shall be taught in Industry by the Faculty appointed by
Applicant.
4. To provide canteen, transport, insurance, medical and other facility as per industry rules
to the students of Learn while Earn Scheme
5. To pay monthly stipend to the student and all other expenses including enrolment fee,
examination fee, etc.,
6. To allow and facilitate the student to appear for the examination as per the rules and
regulations of MSBTE.
7. To provide the Notice Board for the applicant for regular notices and information to the
students to be displayed
Applicant:
1. To interact with industries, understand their needs and accordingly place the student of
applicant for On-the-Job training under the Learn while Earn Scheme.
2. To provide expertize to MSBTE for development of curriculum for the required courses.
3. To admit eligible student enrolled under Apprentice Act 1961, and to fill up the
enrolment and examination and other forms of MSBTE with necessary details along with
requisite fees. To submit the same to MSBTE for enrolment and complete all relevant
formalities required as per MSBTE norms
4. To organise classroom teaching for such students and arrange their Practical’s, Training,
Project work, etc., to complete the term work as per MSBTE norms in MSBTE affiliated
institute where relevant infrastructure is available. Applicant shall pay the related
expenses to the Institute, for utilisation of the infrastructure.
5. To appoint Faculty as per guidelines prescribed for conventional short term Diploma
program.
6. To organise the teaching Faculty for the students under the scheme in accordance with the
norms laid down by MSBTE and also to preserve the academic record of the student.
7. To bear the recurring and non-recurring expenditure including the salary and other perks
to the faculty/employees.
8. To enter in to the necessary tie ups with MSBTE affiliated nearby Government or Aided
Polytechnic as approved by MSBTE, for availability of Laboratory to conduct Practical’s
and examination (theory and practical) on cost basis in consultation with MSBTE.
9. To coordinate the completion of all the academic activities of the students as per
academic norms and academic calendar declared by MSBTE.
10. To pay the MSBTE the Affiliation, Examination and any other fees as declared by
MSBTE from time to time in stipulated time period and as per academic calendar. In case
of delay, fine levied by MSBTE is to be paid by applicant, within stipulated time frame.
Applicant shall have to pay all types of fees even after closure of course so far as enrolled
students are learning in the industry
11. To take necessary disciplinary action against the students with help of industry in case of
Misconduct and Misbehaviour. All examinations rules and regulations shall be applicable
to the students under Learn while Earn Scheme
12. To maintain all academic related record of the students. Applicant has to fill necessary
information as per schedule declared by MSBTE for Academic Monitoring.
13. To impart the necessary guidance to the selected students for undergoing the training.
14. To sign tripartite MOU between MSBTE, Industry and Applicant. Separate MOU for
every individual industry shall be necessary
15. To have minimum Office space of 150 Sq. m, Classroom of 80 sq. m per identified
course, Laboratory of 80 sq. m per course, Library of 100 sq. m with other essential
facilities.
MSBTE:
1. To decide programmes and its duration to cater the needs of the candidates as per the
requirements of the Industry.
2. Develop the skill base curriculum to be used specifically for the students enrolled with
MSBTE as per the requirement of industry from time to time by involving experts from
specific industry.
3. To declare academic calendar and examination Time Table.
4. Conducting examination for evaluation of performance of students under Learn while
Earn Scheme at the MSBTE designated examination/assessment centre.
5. To enrol the students twice a year as per MSBTE calendar
6. To exercise academic control over the activities through external academic monitoring.
To assign committee to visit industry and institute where classroom teaching and
laboratory practicals are being performed as a part of academic monitoring.
7. To take necessary action as per rules, if there is any breach of any rules and regulation.
8. To adopt procedure as mentioned at CHAPTER IV PERMISSION, AFFILIATION of
MAHARASHTRA ACT No. XXXVIII OF 1997 for Conditions of affiliation, Procedure
for permission, Procedure for affiliation, Continuation of affiliation, Extension of
affiliation, Inspection of institutions and report, Withdrawal of affiliation or recognition,
etc.
4. Application Form for Conduction of Courses Under Learn while Earn Scheme
To,
Secretary,
MSBTE, Mumbai
Sub- Application for conduction of courses under ‘Learn while Earn Scheme.
I …………….(Name & Designation), undersigned, hereby submit the following
information for conduction of courses under Learn while Earn Scheme.
1. Name of company / Trust:
2. Address of company / Trust:
3. Members of trust / directors of Company:
Sr. No Name Education Designation
4. Contact Person Details: (Secretary / Director)
Name:
Contact No:
E-mail:
5. Year of Establishment of Company/Trust:
6. PAN/TAN number:
7. GST registration number:
8. Establishment/Operation and maintenance of courses under Learn while Earn scheme in
last five years of operations:
Sr. no Name of course Duration Location Approving Authority/ GR no /
University/Board letter no
9. Number of students trained & placed under Learn while Earn scheme in last five years of
operations:
Sr. No Course Name No. of students trained No. of students Placed
10. Average annual turnover from Learn while Earn scheme in during last three financial
years:
Sr. No Financial year Annual turnover from Average annual turn
Learn while Earn scheme over
11. Number of Faculty/Staff on contract or on permanent basis for Learn while Earn scheme:
Sr. No Name of Contract Educational Date of joining
Faculty/Staff /permanent Qualification
12. Number of MoU’ s made with industry for implementation of Learn while Earn scheme
in last five years of operations:
Sr. No Name of Diploma Courses Location MoU Duration
Industry (Nomenclature other
than AICTE)
13. Diploma Courses (Nomenclature other than AICTE) proposed to be conducted under
Learn while Earn scheme:
Sr. No Name of course Duration Proposed Intake
14. MoU, if any, with industry for proposed courses under Learn while Earn scheme:
Sr. No Name of the Industry Course Location Duration of MoU
Name
15. Stipend offered by company:
Sr. No Name of Industry Amount in Rs.
16. Infrastructure / space available with Company/Trust/Society:
a. Number of Classrooms (size in sq. feet)
b. Number of Laboratory (size in sq. feet)
c. Office space size in sq. Feet
d. Other
The above information provided by me is true and correct to the best of my knowledge. I
know that, if the information, at any stage, is found incorrect, the said application will not be
processed and shall be rejected.
(Signature of Authorized Officer of the organization)
Name of Authorized Signatory…………………………………………..
Name of Organization ………………………………..
Date……
Contact details…………
Seal of Trust / Company
