VEERMATA JIJABAI TECHNOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
(VJTI)
MATUNGA, MUMBAI 400 019
Manual of Rules
For
Three Year Master of Computer Applications (MCA) Programme
And
Two Year Post Graduate Programmes Leading to
Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
Implemented from the batch admitted in Academic Year 2013-14
1
VEERMATA JIJABAI TECHNOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
(Autonomous Institute affiliated to University of Mumbai)
Manual of Rules
For
201 Three Year Master of Computer Applications Programme
And
Two Year Post Graduate Programmes Leading to
Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
in
202 Civil Engineering (with specialization in Environmental Engineering)
203 Civil Engineering (with specialization in Construction Management)
204 Civil Engineering (with specialization in Structural Engineering)
205 Computer Engineering
206 Electrical Engineering (with specialization in Power Systems)
207 Electrical Engineering (with specialization in Control Systems)
208 Electronics Engineering
209 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Machine Design)
210 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Automobile Engineering)
211 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in CAD/CAM & Automation)
212 Production Engineering
213 Textile Technology
215 Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering
214 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Mechatronics)
216 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Thermal Engineering)
217 Computer Engineering (with specialization in Network Infrastructure
Management Systems)
218 Information Technology (with specialization in Software Engineering)
219 Project Management
2
INTRODUCTION
This manual sets out the rules, procedures and requirements of the postgraduate programmes of
study that fall under the purview of Academic Council of VJTI.
The rules and regulations described in this manual are applicable to three years “201 Master of
Computer Applications” Programme and two year Master of Technology programmes listed
below:
202 Civil Engineering (with specialization in Environmental Engineering)
203 Civil Engineering (with specialization in Construction Management)
204 Civil Engineering (with specialization in Structural Engineering)
205 Computer Engineering
206 Electrical Engineering (with specialization in Power Systems)
207 Electrical Engineering (with specialization in Control Systems)
208 Electronics Engineering
209 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Machine Design)
210 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Automobile Engineering)
211 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in CAD/CAM & Automation)
212 Production Engineering
213 Textile Technology
215 Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering
214 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Mechatronics)
216 Mechanical Engineering (with specialization in Thermal Engineering)
217 Computer Engineering (with specialization in Network Infrastructure
Management Systems)
218 Information Technology (with specialization in Software Engineering)
219 Project Management
1. Admissions
Admissions to the first year of all the programmes is made before the start of each academic
year as per the procedure finalized by the Competent Authority appointed by Government of
Maharashtra state, from time to time. A limited number of students are admitted at the second
year of MCA programme under the lateral entry scheme procedure finalized by the Competent
Authority appointed by Government of Maharashtra state.
The Institute reserves the right to revoke the admission made to a candidate, if it is found at any
time after admission that she/he does not fulfill all the requirements stipulated in the offer of
admission.
The Institute also reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student and discontinue
her/his studies at any stage of studentship for unsatisfactory academic performance and/or
undisciplined conduct.
3
2. Academic Calendar
The academic activities of the Institute are regulated by Academic Calendar approved by the
Chairman, Academic Council and released at the beginning of each year. It is mandatory for
students and faculty to strictly adhere to the academic calendar for completion of academic
activities. Academic Calendar can be seen on Institute website.(http://www.vjti.ac.in/)
3. Attendance
Attendance in the class is compulsory and is monitored every four weeks. The Institute expects
100%attendance. However, due to ill-health or other emergency situations, absence up to 20% is
considered on case to case basis on production of documentary proof. In case, attendance of a
student falls short by more than 20%, the course instructor shall warn the student in writing
every four weeks and keep the Programme coordinator / Head of Department informed. In case
of a student whose attendance falls short by more than 20% at the end of a semester, the
Department Academic Committee (DAC) shall forward details of the same along with specific
recommendation to Dean (Academic Programs) for further action. A student not having 80%
attendance is likely to be debarred from appearing in the semester-end examination and given a
“RR” grade. Such a student is required to re-register for the same course in a subsequent
semester, when the course is offered next. In case a student is unable to attend classes for more
than four weeks in a semester, she/he may apply to the Dean (Academic Programs) through
Chairman, DAC, for withdrawal from the semester, which shall mean, withdrawal from all the
registered courses in the semester. However such application should be made as early as
possible and latest before the start of End Semester Examinations. Any application on medical
grounds should be accompanied with a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner
containing the registration number of the practitioner.
4. Programme Structure
All students admitted for any of the postgraduate programmes, undergo two year - four-semester
studies (three year – six semesters in case of MCA programme). Every programme has a
prescribed course structure which in general is termed as the Curriculum. It prescribes all the
theory courses, laboratory courses and other requirements for the degree and sets out the
nominal sequence semester-wise. It also gives the syllabi and a list of textbooks and reference
books for each course.
4
4.1: Course Credit Structure
In general, a certain quantum of academic work measured in terms of credits is laid down as the
requirements for the MCA / M. Tech. degree. A student earns credits by satisfactorily passing
courses/carrying out other academic activities every semester. The amount of credits associated
with a course is dependent upon the number of hours of instruction per week in that course.
Similarly, the credits associated with any of the other activities, is dependent upon the quantum
of work expected to be put in for each of the other activity per week.
4.2: Theory and Laboratory Courses
Courses are broadly classified as Theory courses and Laboratory Courses. Theory courses
consist of lecture (L) and tutorial (T) hours. Laboratory courses consist of practical hours.
Credit(C) for a course is dependent on the number of hours of instruction per week in that
course, and is obtained by using a multiplier of one (1)for lecture and tutorial hours, and a
multiplier of zero point five (0.5) for laboratory hours. Thus, for example, a theory course
having two lectures and one tutorial per week throughout the semester carries a credit of 3.
Similarly, a laboratory course having three laboratory hours per week throughout semester
carries a credit of 1.5. The M.Tech project is carried out in semester III and IV and carries 24
credits, while the MCA project is carried out in semester VI and carries 10 credits. General
pattern of the contact hours and credits for a typical semester is as indicated below:
Lecture Tutorial Practical Co-Curricular Total Hours Credits
15 - 12 8 35 21
5
The scheme is prescribed in following format:
Examination Scheme
Course Name Hours/Week Credits
(Evaluation in % Weightage)
ESE
L T P TA IST ESE Total (W)
(hrs)
Theory Course 1 3 - - 3 20 20 60 100 3
Theory Course 2 3 - - 3 20 20 60 100 3
Theory Course 3 3 - - 3 20 20 60 100 3
Theory Course 4 3 - - 3 20 20 60 100 3
Theory Course 5 3 - - 3 20 20 60 100 3
Communications Skills 2 - - - Pass / No Pass
Total 17 - 15
Examination Scheme
Course Name Hours/Week Credits
(Evaluation in % Weightage)
ESE
L T P TA ESE (O / P) Total (P)
(hrs)
Lab Course 1 - - 3 1.5 50 50 100 -
Lab Course 2 - - 3 1.5 50 50 100 -
Lab Course 3 - - 3 1.5 50 50 100 -
Seminar - - 3 1.5 25 - 25 -
Total - - 12 6
Course Name Hours/Week
L T P
Industry-Academia
- - 2 Attended/Not Attended
Interaction
E-Library - - 2 -
Internet - - 2
Total - - 6
4.3:Project:
Project is a course wherein, under the guidance of a faculty member assigned by the
Department, a student is required to do some innovative work with the application of knowledge
gained while undergoing various courses in the earlier year. The student is expected to do a
survey of literature in the subject, work out a project plan and theoretical analysis, experimental
investigation, a proto-type design, analysis of data and development of new relationships,
fabrication and set up of new equipment etc. Through the project, the student has to exhibit both
the analytical and practical skills.
The M.Tech. project is evaluated in three stages. The first stage and second stage evaluation is
done by a committee of institute faculty (at least two faculty members including project guide).
The first stage evaluation is done at the end of pre-final semester. The second stage evaluation is
6
done during the final semester before submission of the synopsis. A committee comprising a
minimum of two examiners including the guide and an external examiner carries out the third
stage evaluation at the end of final semester.
After the Second stage evaluation, one copy of the synopsis of the project work done and name
of external examiner duly endorsed by the DAC is sent to Examination Section for approval of
Dean (AP). The student has to submit the Synopsis at least one month prior to the prescribed last
date of submission of project report. The student has to submit the Dissertation on or before the
prescribed date mentioned in the Academic Calendar. Those students, who are unable to submit
by the due date, will have to apply for extension with justification before the last date of
submission of synopsis. The guide should forward the application through Head of the
Department, with a recommendation of period of extension to Dean (Academic Programs) for
final decision on the application.
Student has to submit two soft-bound copies of the dissertation to the Programme Coordinator or
a faculty duly authorized by DAC, who will forward the same to the examiners.
After the third stage evaluation, if the Project work is accepted by the Examiners, student should
submit one hardbound copy (after making corrections, if any, as suggested by examiners) to the
department. This copy is to be maintained in the Department for record. One soft copy on a CD
has to be submitted for record of the Central Library.
During the third stage evaluation, 25% weightage shall be given for the initiative, interest, effort
and sincerity shown by the student during the entire project work. Another 50% weightage shall
be given for the depth of knowledge depicted and level of analytical skills shown in the report
and during viva. 25% weightage shall be given to the presentation of report and seminar.
The M.Tech. project carries twenty four (24) credits. The first and second stage assessments
carry six (6) credits each. Twelve credits are given to third stage evaluation.
The MCA project is evaluated in a single stage at the end of the final semester. It carries 10
credits.
Students submitting the reports late or those who have to re-submit the report due to fail grades
shall be entitled to a maximum grade of BB.
4.4: Seminar
Seminar is a course where in under the guidance of a faculty member, a group of students is
expected to survey published technical literature, understand different aspects of the problem
7
and arrive at a report. While doing a seminar course, the student is expected to critically analyze
research work of various authors, learn the investigation methodologies, study concepts,
techniques and the results presented in these papers, and present a seminar report. It is
mandatory to give a seminar presentation before the seminar guide. Seminars typically carry 1.5
credits.
4.4: Non-Credit Requirement :
All students admitted to first year of the two year M.Tech. programme have to undergo a
noncredit course on communication skills in first and second semester of the programme. No
credits are awarded for this course, but a PASS (grade of P) in this course is essential for award
of the Degree. However, if a student fails to get a PASS (Grade of P) before entering into
Second year, the student has to undergo a summer course in Language Laboratory.
5. Examination / Assessment:
5.1: Modes of Evaluation
Semester wise performance assessment of every registered student is done through various
modes of examination. These include quizzes, class tests, home assignments, group assignments,
viva-voce, Mid-Semester Examination and Semester-End Examination. The Instructor will
announce the modes of evaluation and distribution of weightage for each of the assessments at
the beginning of the course. Various modes of assessment for theory and laboratory courses
along with the recommended relative weightage of various components are given in this section.
5.1.1: Modes of Evaluation for Theory Courses
The Institute follows a continuous evaluation system. A typical theory course evaluation shall
have term-work assessment (TA), in-semester tests (IST) and an end-semester examination
(ESE).The term-work assessment will be carried out by the course instructor on the basis of at
least four components like attendance, quiz, assignments, problems, paper or report on a topic,
seminar etc.
For Evaluation against In-semester tests (IST) there will one mid-semester test (MST) and two
class tests (one prior and one after the mid semester test). The Mid semester test will carry forty
marks and the two class tests will carry ten marks each. Score for In-semester tests will be
calculated by giving 33% weightage to both of the class tests together and 67 % weightage to
8
MST. The weightage assigned to each of the evaluation components for each course is indicated
along with the scheme of evaluation. The weightages for term work assessment, in-semester test
and end-semester examination for each course is 20:20:60. The course instructor shall
continuously grade the performance of the student in various components of the term-work
and the student shall be kept informed about the performance. The instructor has to prepare a
marks list for the performance of students in the in-semester examination. The test papers will
be returned to the students after taking signature of the students on the marks list. Sample copies
(at least three) of the term-work of all courses, on the basis of which the term work assessment is
done, shall be preserved in the department for a period of at least three academic years. The end
semester examination shall cover full syllabus of the course.
Attendance in the end semester examination is compulsory. If a student misses the examination
due to personal illness, accident or any untoward incident, student should apply to the Controller
of Examinations through the DAC within three days for a permission to appear for next
examination. If the student fails to produce the necessary proofs, the student will be deemed to
be failed in those courses and will be awarded RR grade. The student shall then be required to
repeat the courses. Evaluated end-semester examination answer books shall be preserved by the
examination section for a period of at least one academic year.
5.1.2: Modes of Evaluation for Laboratory Courses
The assessment in a laboratory course will be based on turn-to-turn supervision of the student’s
work, her/his performance in viva-voce examinations and group discussions, the quality of their
work as prescribed through laboratory journals and a semester-end practical or oral examination.
It is obligatory to maintain a laboratory journal as prescribed by the course instructor. The
weightages are 50:50 for term work assessment and end-semester examination.
5.2: Grading
The Institute follows a relative grading system. Based on the combined performance in all
assessments, the student is awarded a letter grade in every course taken by her/him in a
particular semester as per the curriculum. The grade awarded to a student depends not on her /
his absolute performance but her / his performance relative to other students in her / his class.
These letter grades not only indicate a qualitative assessment of the student’s performance but
also carry a quantitative (numeric)equivalent called the Grade Point. The letter grades and their
equivalent grade points are given below
9
Grading Scheme
Letter Grade Grade Point Indicative degree of mastery
AA 10.0 Outstanding
AB 9.0 Excellent
BB 8.0 Very good
BC 7.0 Good
CC 6.0 Satisfactory
CD 5.0 Average
DD 4.0 Marginal
EE 2.0 Unsatisfactory
FF 0.0 Very weak
Letter Grade Explanation
AU Audit
PP / NP Passed / Not Passed
A / NA Attended / Not Attended
II In complete due to non-appearance in end semester
examination on health grounds.
RR Fail due to lack of attendance or non-appearance in
end semester examination, should repeat the course.
The above grades do not have any grade points associated with them.
The student passes the course if she/he scores any grade from AA to DD, grades EE and FF
being fail grades.
The II (Incomplete) grade is awarded due to non-appearance in end semester examination on
health grounds. The student has to appear for the end semester examination for the course when
it is conducted next.
The RR grade is awarded if the student fails to have minimum attendance for the classes
(including laboratory courses) or if the student fails to attend the end-semester examination
without having any valid reasons. Such a student has to repeat that course whenever it is offered
again.
A student has to pass a course in not more than three end-semester examinations, including any
re-examination conducted for the course. If the student fails to do so, she/he shall have to repeat
the course whenever it is offered next.
10
If a student fails to appear for any of the end-semester examination due to reasons beyond
control, the student should inform the Head of the department within three days of start of
examination.
A student will have a maximum of three attempts to pass a course. For the second and third
attempt, the student’s grade sheet will indicate “Passed in second/third attempt”
If a student repeats a course, his grade sheet will indicate “course repeated”.
The most recent grade for the course is taken into account for the computation of SPI / CPI.
There is no provision for improvement of grades in individual courses.
5.4: Academic Malpractice
Academic malpractices are severely dealt with. In case of malpractice during any evaluation like
assignments, quizzes, tests, and examinations, the case should be referred to Unfair Means
Committee formed for the purpose. A student shall be suitably punished if the unfair means
committee prima facie finds the student has resorted to malpractice or any other unfair means.
5.5: Performance Indices
5.5.1: Semester Performance Index (SPI)
The performance of a student in a semester is indicated by a number called Semester
Performance Index, SPI. The SPI is the weighted average of the grade points obtained in all the
courses registered by the student during the semester. For example, if a student appears for five
courses (Theory/labs./Projects/ etc.) in a semester with credits C1, C2, C3, C4 and C5 and
her/his grade points in these courses are g1, g2, g3, g4 and g5 respectively, then her/his SPI is
equal to:
The SPI is calculated to two decimal places.
The SPI for any semester will take into consideration the RR/II grades awarded in that semester.
For example if a student has failed in course 4 with FF grade, the SPI will then be computed as:
11
5.5.2 Cumulative Performance Index (CPI)
An up to date assessment of the overall performance of a student from the time she/he entered
the Institute is obtained by calculating a number called the Cumulative Performance Index, CPI,
in a manner similar to the calculation of SPI. The CPI therefore considers all the courses
registered by the student, towards the minimum requirement of the degree she/he has enrolled
for, since she/he entered the Institute. The CPI is calculated at the end of every semester to one
decimal place and is indicated in semester grade reports. In the semester where the student has
failed in course(s), her/his grade sheet will not indicate any CPI.
A CPI of 6.75 or above will be considered as equivalent to First Class (60%) of similar
programmes of the University. The institute may issue a separate certificate mentioning first
class to only those candidates acquiring CPI 6.75 or above.
6.Programme duration
A student of two year post graduate degree programme who fails to graduate within three years
from date of admission to programme shall be terminated from the programme. A student of
three year post graduate degree who fails to graduate within five years from date of admission to
programme shall be terminated from the programme.
7. Promotion to next year for PG Programme
7.1: M.Tech.
A student will be promoted and allowed to register for the Second year if she/he has acquired
minimum of 36 credits in first year .A student who fails to earn a CPI of 5.0 at the end of first
year has to repeat the course/s in which she / he has failed or earned a grade of ‘DD’, provided
the course/s is offered, on the recommendation of DAC and approval of Dean (AP).
7.2: MCA
A student will be promoted and allowed to register for the Second year if she/he has acquired
minimum of 36 credits in first year. A student will be promoted and allowed to register for the
Third year if she/he has cleared all courses of the first year and acquired minimum of 36 credits
in second year. A student who fails to earn a CPI of 5.0 at the end of first year / second year /
third year, has to repeat the course/s in which she / he has failed or earned a grade of ‘DD’,
provided the course/s is offered, on the recommendation of DAC and approval of Dean(AP).
12
8. Eligibility for the Award of Degree
The names of the students who satisfy below mentioned requirements shall be forwarded to the
University of Mumbai for award of MCA or M. Tech. in the relevant discipline.
 The student should have studied and passed all the courses and acquired necessary
number of credits as per the requirements of a particular degree programme and as
prescribed by the Institute from time to time within the stipulated time from date of first
registration to programme.
 The student should have paid all the Institute and University dues including the dues of
Department, Hostels, Library and other units.
 Obtained a CPI of atleast 5.00 at the end of the semester in which she/he completes all
the requirements for the award of Degree;
 No case or disciplinary action is pending against her/him.
9. Improvement in CPI
9.1: M.Tech Programme
If a student has graduated, but wishes to improve her / his CPI, she / he will have to
appear for end semester examination of atleast two courses of Semester I and Semester II
within two years of graduation by paying the required examination fees. Only one
attempt is provided for such improvement. The result of such examination will be
declared only if there is improvement in CPI over earlier CPI.
9.2 MCA Programme
If a student has graduated, but wishes to improve her / his CPI, she / he will have to
appear for end semester examination of atleast three courses (except for the project) of
Semester IV and Semester V within two years of graduation by paying the required
examination fees. Only one attempt is provided for such improvement. The result of
such examination will be declared only if there is improvement in CPI over earlier
CPI.
13
