VEERMATA JIJABAI TECHNOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
(VJTI)
MATUNGA, MUMBAI 400 019
(Autonomous Institute affiliated to University of Mumbai)
Manual of Rules
For
Doctor of Philosophy (Technology) Programmes
Implemented from the batch admitted in AcademicYear2015-16
1
VEERMATAJIJABAITECHNOLOGICALINSTITUTE
(Autonomous Institute affiliated to University of Mumbai)
Manual of Rules
For
Doctor of Philosophy
(Technology)Programmes
in
° 901 Civil Engineering
° 902 Mechanical Engineering
° 903 Electrical Engineering
° 904 Production Engineering
° 905 Textile Technology
° 906 Electronics Engineering
° 907 Computer Engineering
Implemented from the batch admitted in AcademicYear2015-16
2
INTRODUCTION
This manual sets out the rules, procedures and requirements of the Doctor of Philosophy
(Technology) programmes that fall under the purview of Academic Council of VJTI.
The rules and regulations described in this manual are applicable to the programmes listed
below:
901 Civil Engineering
902 Mechanical Engineering
903 Electrical Engineering
904 Production Engineering
905 Textile Technology
906 Electronics Engineering
907 Computer Engineering
1 Eligibility for Admission
1.1 A candidate shall be considered eligible for registration for the degree of Ph.D.
provided that the candidate satisfies one of the following:
i) Candidate must have obtained Bachelor’s degree and Master’s degree in technology or
engineering with minimum 60% marks (55% marks in case of reserved category) in
either of the two or a CPI/CGPA of 6.75 or above on a 10 point scale (CPI/CGPA of
6.25 or above on a 10 point scale in case of reserved category)
ii) Candidate who is currently an approved teacher having approved full time teaching
experience of at least FIVE years.
iii) A candidate from a research organization or industry is considered eligible for
registration for the degree of Ph.D. provided that the candidate satisfies the following:
a) Having obtained Bachelor’s degree and Master’s degree in technology or
engineering.
b) Having THREE years technical/ industrial experience in the field of interest.
c) Having visibility/acceptability of his/her work by way of paper presentations in
reputed conferences, peer reviewed journals and/or research project completion in
the field of interest.
d) Having sponsorship from the parent organization. (Candidate shall submit a
sponsorship letter from the parent organization in the prescribed format)
Such Candidates will preferably be selected for a joint research project from sponsoring
organization. Infrastructural and financial support will come from the sponsoring organization
(with Memorandum of Understanding between the sponsoring organization and VJTI).
Supervision will be jointly done by a faculty from the institute and a person qualified to
supervise Ph.D. work from the sponsoring research organization/industry.
2 Selection process
2.1 The candidate has to undergo a written test as per the UGC norms for Ph. D. program in
the concerned department.
2.2 Department shall provide candidates with the details of research areas in the department.
3
2.3 The eligible candidates will have to undergo an interview by a panel formed for the
purpose, including Head of the department and all eligible research guides in the
department.
2.4 The final recommendations of the department will be forwarded through respective
Departmental Academic Committee (DAC) to Dean (Academic Programmes) for final
approval of Director / Chairman Academic Council.
2.5 After approval process, the candidate will be informed regarding selection and shall be
offered registration to Ph. D. program of the Institute after payment of necessary fees
within stipulated time. If candidate fails to accept the offer of admission within a
specified time limit, the offer of registration shall stand cancelled and the candidate will
have no claim afterwards.
2.6 Candidate has to prepare an outline of the proposed research work in consultation with
the supervisor/s and submit the same to respective DAC within a maximum period of
nine months from the date of registration. Completion of course work of 9 credits with a
CPI of 6.0 & above and approval of the proposal by the PhD affairs committee is must
for further continuation of the PhD registration.
3 Exemption from the Written Test
3.1 A candidate who has appeared for the PhD entrance test (PET) of University of Mumbai
and has valid PET score is exempted from the written examination for Ph.D., conducted
by the departments.
3.2 A candidate with valid GATE score in the relevant field is exempted from the written
examination for PhD, conducted by the department.
3.3 Approved teachers appointed in the University of Mumbai or its affiliated colleges having
not less than Five years, full time continuous teaching experience after the date of First
approval of appointment shall be exempted from the written examination for PhD,
conducted by the department. The copy of approval letter has to be attached as proof
along with application.
4 Categories of Ph. D. candidates
The Institute admits Ph. D. candidates under following categories:
4.1 Full-time research scholar
Candidate is required to be available in the institute full time for period of atleast three
years. There is possibility of Research / Teaching assistantship available to the
candidate from institute funds or research projects. Candidates sponsored by their
parent organizations cannot avail of Research / Teaching assistantship. Sponsored
candidates have to produce sponsorship letter in given format along with application
form.
4.2 Part-time research scholar
Candidate is required to complete at least two semester of residential requirement at
the institute. Sponsored candidates have to produce sponsorship letter in given format
along with application form. Institute internal candidates have to apply as part time
research scholars only. Internal candidates have to work under VJTI supervisor and/or
external supervisor from IIT or other research organizations (optional with
recommendation from DAC).
4
5 Course credit requirements
5.1 All research scholars registering for PhD programme are required to acquire minimum
of 12 credits from amongst M Tech level courses (04 theory courses including
Computational Methods course and Research Methodology course) within first two
semesters after registration.
5.2 The courses on computational methods and research methodology are compulsory for
all the research scholars admitted in the Institute.
5.3 The remaining courses may also be taken from parent department of the research
scholar or other departments of VJTI or from IIT or other reputed institutes, with
whom VJTI has MOU, on the advice of the supervisor(s), recommendation of
respective DAC and approval of Dean (Academic Programs). Internal research
scholars must compulsorily register for these courses at IIT Bombay.
5.4 Every registered research scholar will have to deliver a seminar by studying at least
five quality research papers in the chosen field of interest as suggested by the
supervisor, which will be evaluated by a committee of three faculty members who are
research supervisors, and satisfactory performance is must for further continuance of
registration.
5.5 The research scholar should acquire a minimum CPI of 6.0 in the registered courses for
further continuation in the PhD programme. The research scholar who fails to satisfy
the requirement of minimum CPI of 6.0 within first year of admission has to
discontinue the programme.
6 Evaluation and assessment
6.1 The DAC will form at least a three member Research Progress Committee (RPC) for
every research scholar. RPC shall consist of members, who are conversant with the field
of research and shall include;
- Supervisor/s,
- Internal faculty of VJTI having knowledge of the research area
- External member from IIT or other institutes / organizations of repute
The names of RPC members along with the courses to be completed by the research
scholar shall be communicated to PAC through Dean (AP) within nine months of
provisional admission to the programme.
6.2 The research scholar has to submit progress report through Supervisor, to the RPC at the
end of every year.
6.3 At the end of every year, the research scholar will present his research work in an Annual
Progress Seminar (APS) to the RPC, postgraduate students and faculty. Such seminars
are required to be given every year until the submission of synopsis. Further, the research
scholar has to mandatorily participate in the annual VJTI Ph.D. Colloquium and present
his research in form of a poster presentation, to the satisfaction of evaluators.
6.4 The RPC will monitor the progress of research work of the candidate until completion of
the programme.
6.5 The continuation of registration of scholar is subject to satisfactory progress and
recommendation of respective RPC on annual basis.
6.6 The delay in submission of progress report and presentation may lead to discontinuation
of Institute assistantship or/and cancellation of registration for the program.
6.7 The research scholar has to give atleast three Annual Progress Seminars. The RPC, in the
third or any subsequent APS will decide whether the scholar has completed research
5
work to an extent that his pre-synopsis seminar can be held and note its recommendations
in the APS report.
6.8 The research scholar during the pre-synopsis seminar has to present her / his complete
research work and include all suggestions of the RPC in the final thesis. The final thesis
has to be submitted within three months of the pre-synopsis seminar.
6.9 The thesis submitted by the research scholar will be evaluated by three external referees.
Atleast two referees have to recommend acceptance of thesis with or without corrections /
modifications. Finally the research scholar has to undergo a comprehensive viva voce
examination which has to be openly defended. The committee of examiners for the open
defence shall consist of one of the external referees, the supervisor and the Head of
Department / Professor, who will work as Chairman of the committee. After successful
defence of the comprehensive viva voce, the name of the research scholar shall be
communicated to the University of Mumbai for award of Doctor of Philosophy
(Technology) degree in the concerned discipline of engineering.
6.10 If two of the referees recommend not acceptance of thesis, the RPC will meet to review
the reports submitted by the referees and in tune with the reports, instruct the research
scholar to modify the thesis in line with the reports of the referees. The RPC may instruct
the research scholar to carry out further work also. The modified thesis is resubmitted to
the referees. If the two of the referees still recommend non acceptance of thesis, the
candidature of the research scholar will be terminated.
7 Award of degree
7.1 All full time research scholars have to work for a minimum period of three calendar years
from the date of registration before submission of thesis, while all part time research
scholars, including internal research scholars, have to work for a minimum period of four
calendar years from the date of registration before submission of thesis.
7.2 The validity of registration of the research scholar is six calendar years.
7.3 A research scholar will not be permitted to submit a thesis, a work for which a degree or
diploma or any other academic award has been conferred on the candidate by any
university / academic body.
7.4 A research scholar will be permitted to submit a thesis, only if the research scholar has to
his credit atleast one journal paper in a journal of repute having reasonable impact factor
and atleast one conference paper in a conference organized by IITs / NITs / reputed
engineering colleges / reputed professional societies.
6
