VEERMATA JIJABAI TECHNOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
MATUNGA, MUMBAI 400 019
Diploma Examination Rules
And Procedures
Revision (October 2017)
Approved in 51st meeting of Board of Governance
Dated 26th September 2018
1
CONTENTS
PARTICULARS Page
No.
SECTION 1: PREAMBLE 5
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS 5
SECTION 3: ADMISSION TO COURSE 7
RULE - 1: Eligibility
A. First Year Post SSC Diploma 7
B. Direct admission to third semester / second year 7
SECTION 4: ADMISSION TO SEMESTER AND EXAMINATION 8
RULE - 2: Registering to a Semester 8
RULE - 3: Eligibility Criteria for Admission to Higher Semester 8
RULE - 4: Admission to an Examination
A. Eligibility for appearing for an examination for Regular and Repeater 8
Students 9
B. Application for admission to an examination for casual and Ex-student 9
C. Schedule for payment of Fees and Penalties 9
D. Refund of Examination Fees 9
E. Fees concession for Reservation students 9
F. Condoning deficiency in attendance 10
G. Cancellation of term and application for examination 10
H. Action against Defaulting Students
I. Admission to Examination Hall 10
a) Mandatory Documents for a Student during Examination 10
b) Penalty to a student lacking mandatory documents 10
J. Student Ineligible to Appear In Examination 10
K. Failing to Appear in the Examination 10
L. Reappearance in passed examination
RULE – 5: Registration of a failed student to the same year as Repeater Student 10
RULE – 6: Exemptions 11
RULE – 7: Opportunity to complete Diploma in old curriculum 11
SECTION 5: TEACHING, EVALUATION AND EXAMINATION SCHEME 12
RULE – 8: Courses and Heads of Passing 12
RULE - 9: Assessment of Term work
2
A. Criteria for assessment 12
B. Method of evaluation 12
C. Marks Distribution based on attendance, continuous evaluation and final 12
submission
D. Failure in Term work 13
RULE - 10: Assessment of Oral/Practical/Project/Seminar Examination
A. Conducting the examination 13
B. Criteria of assessing the performance 13
C. Evaluation of examination 13
D. Failure in an examination 13
SECTION 6: CONDUCT OF EXAMINATION 14
RULE - 11: Examination pattern 14
RULE - 12: In Semester Test ( IST) during the semester 14
RULE - 13: End Semester Examination (ESE)
A. General 14
B. Examination Period and Timetable 14
C. Modes of Examination 14
D. Courses at an Examination 15
E. Curriculum for Courses at Examination 15
F. Medium of Examination 15
G. Permission for writer 15
H. Allowance / concession of extra time to disabled student 15
I. Concession to students with learning disability 15
RULE - 14: Re-Examination 16
RULE - 15: Penalty for acts of misconduct 16
RULE - 16: Punishment norms for unfair means 16
SECTION 7: RESULT PROCESSING 18
RULE - 17: Standard for passing 18
RULE - 18: Declaration of result 18
A. Result Status 18
B. Abbreviations 19
C. Results Held in Reserve (RHR) 19
D. Processing Adversely Affected Result before Its Declaration 19
E. Allotment of abnormally high or low internal marks: 19
F. Amendment in Declared Results 19
G. Amendment in the Declared Result Owing to Misconduct 19
H. Implementation of the amended result by the institute 20
RULE - 19: Grace marks
A. For course 20
B. For Aggregate 20
3
RULE - 20: Condonation 20
RULE - 21: Award of Class for Semester Examination 21
RULE - 22: Award of class for Diploma 21
RULE – 23: Carrying Forward Marks of Ex-Students for Exemptions 21
SECTION 8: POST EXAMINATION PROCEDURES 22
ITEM - 1: Showing of Assessed Answerbooks 22
ITEM - 2: Grievance Redressal Mechanism 22
ITEM - 3: Issuing statement of marks
A. Original 22
B. Duplicate 22
ITEM - 4: Issuing statement of marks for award of Diploma 22
A. Original 22
B. Duplicate 22
ITEM - 5: Issuing Diploma Certificate 22
A. Original 22
B. Duplicate 23
ITEM - 6: Issuing Transcript 23
ITEM – 7: Name correction on documents 23
SECTION 9: MISCELLANEOUS 24
ITEM - 8: Time limit for preservation of Assessed Answerbooks 24
ITEM - 9: Retention period of documents 24
ITEM - 10: Time limit for completion of course 24
4
SECTION 1: PREAMBLE
Diploma Examination rules are framed for the Diploma courses offered by VJTI. The rules cover
activities related directly and indirectly with examination. It covers rules regarding admission to a
diploma course in the institute as well as to ongoing semesters. It states rules pertaining to
methods of evaluation during different examinations. The section on ‘Conduct of an Examination’
explains rules and procedures for conducting examinations. ‘Result Processing Section’ deals
with procedures related to processing of result. The activities after the examination are
mentioned in a section on ‘Post Examination Procedures’. Any other issues related to
examination but not covered above are included in ‘Miscellaneous Section’.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
A Student: Anyone who seeks admission to the institute by satisfying admission criteria
mentioned by the technical board from time to time, with the purpose of acquiring knowledge
offered by institute is a student of the institute.
Examination: An evaluation activity conducted by the institute in different forms with an
objective of evaluating a student during and after the course of study is termed as an
examination.
End Semester Examination (ESE): An examination as per above definition; conducted in
written form after the end of term is stated as End Semester Examination.
Oral Examination: An examination as per above definition; conducted to evaluate a student by
asking oral questions and student replying to it orally is termed as an oral examination or viva
examination.
Practical examination: An examination as per above definition, wherein a student is asked to
perform some task related to the concerned course, with or without using equipments,
instruments, tools, apparatus etc wherein the motor skills of the student are made use of and
evaluated; is termed as a practical examination.
Term work: An exercise in written form performed by a student during the course of the
semester, based on instructions given by course teacher from time to time is considered as a
term work. Term work may include assignments, observation tables, solved problems, collection
of data during surveys, experiments and visits etc or any such work assigned by a course
teacher which induces the student to perform study of the said course.
Project: An activity wherein a student studies individually or in group, under the guidance of an
appointed teacher, on an assigned topic with an objective of learning one or more courses
covered in a curriculum.
Seminar: An activity wherein a student puts forward his acquired knowledge in the form of a
speech and/or presentation in front of audience essentially consisting of experts from the
concerned course and with a view of evaluating a student.
5
Question paper: A set of questions put in written form on a paper; asked to a student pertaining
to a particular course, with an intention of evaluating the knowledge of a student about that
course in the form of answers given in specific time duration in written form.
Answer book: A booklet containing specific number of blank ruled papers provided by the
institute to the student for writing answers to questions asked in a written examination through a
question paper.
In-Semester test: A method of evaluating a student during the term by conducting a written
examination, of marks as specified in the scheme is termed as In-Semester test.
Ex-student: A student other than a regular student, who appears for an ESE/Oral/Practical
without attending classes held prior to ESE, will be an Ex-student. The term work, IST marks of
such student will be carried forward from earlier semester which he/she has attended. He/She
will be registering for the failed courses at the beginning of the term, as Ex-student by paying
examination fees as specified at that time.
Casual student: A student, who desires to attend classes of the failed course/s, appears for
ISTs and finally ESE; will be considered as Casual student for that course/s. Such student will be
registering as casual student at the beginning of the term and will pay fees as prescribed at that
time. His/her marks earned during earlier ISTs will stand null and void. However the Term work
and/or practical marks will be carried forward from earlier term which he/she had attended. Once
registered for the course/s of a particular semester; he/she will not be allowed to register for any
other semester during that term. Attendance rule RULE 4/A-1 (i) is not applicable for casual
students.
Repeater student: A student falling in fail category as per RULE 18A can appear as a repeater
student. The marks earned by a ‘Repeater Student’ in earlier semester in all the course heads
viz. theory, orals, term work etc for all courses will stand cancelled. He/she will be preparing a
fresh term work, appearing for all exams viz. theory (including IST) orals, practical etc. as
prescribed in the scheme of the curriculum.
Regular student: A student who becomes eligible as per RULE 3 will be considered as a regular
student for an academic year.
ATKT: An abbreviation for ‘Allowed To Keep Term’ for the failed courses which indicates that a
student will be taking admission to the next higher semester and will appear for examination of
failure courses as Ex-student as stated in the definition above.
6
SECTION 3: ADMISSION TO COURSE
RULE – 1: Eligibility
A. First Year Post SSC Diploma
A candidate shall be eligible to be admitted to a course for First Year Diploma after
passing the qualifying examination or an equivalent examination as prescribed for
admission to the course, and fulfilling other conditions as prescribed for the
admission to the course, by the Directorate of Technical Education or Government of
Maharashtra or the Competent Admission Authority or the Board.
B. Direct admission to third semester /Second year
A candidate passing qualifying examination from a recognized board shall be eligible
for direct admission to third semester for semester pattern courses of a Diploma
course in Engineering and Technology against the seats created solely for this
purpose, subject to the conditions prescribed for the admission to the course, by the
Directorate of Technical Education or Government of Maharashtra at the time of
these admissions.
7
SECTION 4: ADMISSION TO SEMESTER AND EXAMINATION
RULE- 2: Registering to a Semester
i) A regular student will have to register for the semester in which he/she is entering for the
first time.
ii) A student will pay fees, as applicable, at the time of registration.
iii) A casual student, Ex student and Repeater student will also be registering for the
semester in which he/she has one or more failed courses and pay fees as applicable.
iv) A student not registering in time will have to pay a fine as applicable. Once the last date
is over; no student will be allowed to register for that term
v) Students admitted under reserve category at the time of admission to Institute; if
registers again as repeater student of a class during next year; he/she will have to pay full
fees applicable to general category students, as approved by Institute as per RULE 4/E.
RULE- 3: Eligibility criteria for Admission to Higher Semesters
Eligibility Criteria to appear
Sr. Semester Eligibility Criteria for
for
No. Admitted to Semester Admission
End Semester Examination
As declared in the admission brochure for the
1 I I Semester Term Granted
respective year.
2 II I Semester Term Granted II Semester Term Granted
Combined failure of Semester I & II together is
3 III III Semester Granted
not more than FIVE COURSES
4 IV III Semester Term Granted IV Semester Term Granted
i) Semester I & II Passes and
5 V ii) Combined failure of Semester III & IV V Semester Term Granted
together is not more than FIVE COURSES
6 VI V Semester Term Granted VI Semester Term Granted
* Failing in one or more heads of a same course shall be considered as failure in one course.
RULE- 4: Admission to an Examination
A. Eligibility for appearing in an examination for Regular and Repeater Students
1. No students shall be allowed to appear for any of the semester examination of the
Diploma Courses of the Institute unless;
a. he/she produces satisfactory proof of having passed the qualifying examination as
laid down by the Institute and in such courses as prescribed by the Institute.
b. he/she has kept terms for the course in the Institute as per the scheme of instructions
prescribed by the Institute and has fulfilled the conditions laid down here under, that
he/she is certified by the Head of the concerned department.
i) that he/she has attended at least 75% of the total lectures, practicals, tutorials etc. in
every course of the course, as per scheme;
ii) that he /she has satisfactorily attended the prescribed laboratory / workshop
practicals, term-work, projects, seminars etc; and has shown satisfactory progress in
the academic studies during continuous evaluation. (Criteria and method of
8
continuous evaluation as prescribed in RULE 9/C)
iii) that he/she is of good conduct and character.
2. A student having attendance less than 75% of total lectures/practicals, tutorials, etc.
as per the scheme for any course/courses will be considered as ‘Attendance
defaulter’. If a student is an attendance defaulter and has not done his/her term work
from time to time during the term, will not be eligible to appear for the ESE
examination of that course/courses.
Such student is expected to repeat the subject by attending the lectures /practical’s in
the said subject and by appearing for IST/ESE /Orals/Practical’s and completing term
work in the subsequent term. ATKT rules (not failing in more than five- subjects to
Allow to Keep Term) will not be applicable to such students.
3. A student who has failed in term work or has not submitted his/her term work
Files/Journals/Drawing sheets for a particular subject will have to complete his/her
term work in consultation with the concerned faculty in the subsequent term and the
faculty will then submit his/her term work marks to the examination section.
B. Application for admission to an examination for Casual and Ex-student
A student intending to appear for an examination as a Casual/ Ex-student shall be
required to fill in an application for admission to the examination in the prescribed
form and forward the same through the Head of the Department on or before the
notified date with necessary examination fees as may be prescribed from time to
time. An additional fee will be charged if the application is received after the notified
date. The Director however has the authority to accept/ reject such late applications
along with late fees decided by him/her. Any application, incomplete in any respect,
is liable to be rejected.
C. Schedule for payment of Fees and Penalties
Schedule for payment of Fees and Penalties will be displayed at the beginning of
every term, along with registration notice.
D. Refund of Examination Fees
Examination fees once paid shall not be held in reserve for future examination. It
shall ordinarily be not refunded, except under following circumstances:
i) If a student submits the examination form with requisite fees, as per the
notice for the ensuing examination, his result being RHR (Result Held in
Reserve), and later he is declared successful, such student would have to
apply for the refund of examination fees within 15 calendar days after the
declaration of his result.
ii) If a student has submitted the examination form with requisite fees, as per
the schedule for the ensuing examination and later he is declared successful
in the examination as per Rule 19A or 20, such student would have to apply
for the refund of examination fees within 15 calendar days after the
declaration of his result.
iii) If a student has submitted the examination form with requisite fees, as per
the schedule for the ensuing examination and later on unfortunately if he dies
before appearing for the examination, the examination fees paid to the
institute shall be refunded to the parents/guardian. For this purpose, the
parents/guardian shall apply to the institute with a copy of the proof of death
and copy of fees receipt. Such application shall be made within two months
9
from the death of the student.
iv) If a student becomes ‘not eligible’ for a particular semester due to failure or
punishment; his/her fees if paid earlier will be refunded and the same will be
paid again by student at the time of becoming eligible again as per the fees
structure at that time.
E. Fees concession for Reservation students
The concession offered to the reservation students will be applicable only for their first
attempt in any year. Such student will have to pay fees same as applicable to other
students if he/she is repeating the whole year for second and more times.
F. Condoning deficiency in attendance
A student’s deficiency in attendance by not more than 10% may be condoned if
1. it is due to illness(certified by a registered medical practitioner)and
2. the student is otherwise eligible.
The authority to condone the deficiency will rest with the Director
G. Cancellation of term and application for examination
Notwithstanding the acceptance of application for admission to Examination and payment
of examination fees and allotment of Examination seat number by the Institute.; the
Director shall be competent to refuse the permission for appearing in the examination to a
student who fails to fulfill any of the conditions laid down under RULE - 4 A above, at any
time before the commencement of the examination.
H. Admission to Examination Hall
a) Mandatory Documents for a Student during Examination
Each student appearing for the examination must possess a valid Identity Card issued by
his institute, bearing his/her sufficiently recent photograph for easy verification of his
identity and examination fees receipt, and produce the same as and when
demanded by an authorized person during examination.
b) Penalty to a student lacking mandatory documents
If a student is unable to produce on demand the mandatory documents mentioned above,
he may not be allowed to appear for the examination.
I. Students Ineligible to Appear in Examination
A student who does not fulfill conditions specified in RULE-4/A shall not be eligible to
appear in that examination. He/She shall have to fulfill all relevant conditions by seeking
fresh admission to the same semester/ year anew.
J. Failing to Appear in the Examination
A student, who fulfills all the conditions prescribed in RULE4/A but could not appear in the
examination, may appear for a subsequent examination as an ex-student. In such a case,
the term work marks of the student will be carried forward.
K. Reappearance in passed Examination
No student will be permitted to reappear for a passed course in any of the semester
examinations, except students who have failed in an academic year and registering as a
repeater student.
RULE – 5: Registration of a failed student to the same year as Repeater Student
Students failing in an academic year of the Institute shall be considered for registration to
the same year as a repeater student, with or without change of course or institute,
10
subject to prevailing rules. Such students should submit an application to Dean-Diploma
through the head of the department for registration as a repeater student. While re-
registering such a student, the marks obtained by him in any of the courses or passing
heads, namely theory, practical, term work, oral, project/seminar, inplant training,
progressive assessment or any other head of examination shall not be considered nor shall
the student have any claim on these marks. Further, the student shall submit an affidavit,
to this effect; on a stamp paper of appropriate amount if the student appears with a gap of
one year or more without communication.
RULE – 6: Exemptions
A student, at his option, is entitled to claim exemption in course/s prescribed in institute
curriculum having passed it or its equivalent course in an equivalent examination of a
recognized Board / University provided
i) the percentage of marks obtained by the student at the original examination is
equal to or higher than that of the minimum percentage for passing prescribed by
the Institute in the relevant course/s of the diploma program.
ii) has cleared the examination before the date of admission to the institute
Exemption so admissible will lapse if not claimed at the first attempt at the examination of
the Institute. Student so exempted shall not be entitled to award of class.
RULE – 7: Opportunity to complete Diploma in old curriculum
1. The Students who are unable to pass the course/s in the old curriculum and wish to
appear as Ex-student will be required to appear in examination/s of Equivalent course/s in
the new curriculum. A course in new curriculum will be treated as equivalent course if at
least 80 % of the syllabus is same. Examinations for the courses having no equivalent
courses in new curriculum would be conducted as per the old curriculum.
2. Students from old curriculum who are eligible as a Repeater student for admission to
higher semester/year shall have to complete the diploma in the revised curriculum after
submitting an application to the Head of the concerned department. Diploma Head of
respective program shall recommend the course work required for such students
considering schemes of instructions and evaluation of old and revised curriculum to IAEC.
Such students shall complete the diploma in the revised curriculum after recommendations
from IAEC and approval from the Director.
11
SECTION 5: TEACHING, EVALUATION AND EXAMINATION SCHEME
The teaching, evaluation and examination schemes shall be as per prescribed curriculum
of respective course, course to the revisions and modifications made by the Institute from
time to time which is once in about 5 years.
RULE -8: Courses and Heads of Passing
1. A course may have some or all of the following heads, as may be prescribed in
the teaching and examination scheme of the curriculum.
 Theory
 Practical
 Term Work
 Oral
 Project
 Seminar
2. Each head shall have separate marks. The maximum and minimum passing
marks for each passing head of the course shall be given in the related teaching
and examination scheme.
3. Theory marks will comprise of marks earned in End Semester Examination (ESE)
plus marks earned in Semester Test (IST) conducted as per RULE 12
4. Students will be required to register for the courses for which he/she shall be
attending/appearing for an examination, at the start of every semester by doing
registration.
5. Passing criteria for theory examination will be as per RULE 17
RULE 9: Assessment of Term work
A. Criteria for assessment
Term work shall be assessed on the basis of student's depth of comprehension of the
principles involved and not on the basis of mere collection of data for presentation.
B. Method of evaluation
a. Continuous assessment:
The term work for practical, seminar, projects, assignments, etc. shall be
assessed progressively from time to time and its record shall be maintained by the
course teacher.
b. Final Submission:
A schedule of dates shall be prepared for completion of term work stated in ‘a’
above. The student will submit the completed Term work on such date of
submission.
C. Marks Distribution based on attendance, continuous evaluation and final
submission
Term work
Average of Average of continuous Final submission with Final marks:
attendance per turn evaluation per turn character and conduct Total
(15 %) (70 %) (15 % ) (100 %)
12
D. Failure in Term work
A student scoring less than passing marks for Term Work will be declared as
failed as per RULE 4/A-3
RULE - 10: Assessment of Oral/Practical/Project/Seminar examination
A. Conducting the examination
The examination shall be conducted in presence of internal and external examiner
mentioned as per the scheme. The external examiner shall be from other
polytechnic / institute or industry and having knowledge/expertise of the
concerned course.
B. Criteria of assessing the performance
The performance at an examination shall be assessed on the basis of student's
depth of comprehension of the principles involved. Mere presentation, speech,
gestures that is not expected will not be given credit.
C. Evaluation of an examination
Marks will be collectively assigned by both internal and external examiners
together, on mutual agreement.
D. Failure in an examination
A student scoring less than minimum marks for passing a Oral / Practical / Project
/ Seminar examination as per scheme, will be declared as failed in that course
head.
___________________________________________________________________
13
SECTION 6: CONDUCT OF EXAMINATION
RULE- 11: Examination pattern
The Diploma Courses at VJTI are conducted on Semester pattern. At the end of each
Semester, there will be an examination. Each examination will be considered as a
separate examination.
RULE- 12: In Semester Test (IST) during the semester
1. ONE In Semester Test (IST) will be conducted during an academic term of each
semester.
2. Such IST will be conducted by respective departments as per guidelines/instructions from
examination section for all semesters on the dates mentioned in academic calendar.
3. The IN Semester Test (IST) shall be of 40 marks and 1hr & 30 minutes duration. The 40
marks of IST shall be converted to 20 marks, as per scheme and will shown in mark
sheet.
4. A student who could not attend IST due to unavoidable circumstances can appear for
make-up IST. Such students shall give a written application to the Controller of
Examination through the Head of the Department within five working days after the end of
that IST to appear for make-up IST. The portion of the make-up IST shall be decided by
Head of the Department consultation with COE (Diploma).
5. There will not be any minimum marks for passing in an IST.
RULE – 13: End Semester Examination (ESE)
A. General
1. ESE will be conducted for every course at the end of ongoing semester, odd/even.
2. ESE shall not be conducted for a course, if no student has applied for that course.
3. The question paper for ESE shall have two sections. Section I will be set by internal
examiner while Section II will be set by an external examiner.
4. External examiner shall be any faculty concerned with the course from other institute
or from industry.
5. The Question paper will have two sections of 40 marks each. Each section will
contain 3 questions. Internal options shall be provided for 30-40 % in each section.
B. Examination Period and Timetable
The dates of commencement of examinations shall be as indicated in the academic
calendar of the Institute. The detailed timetable of an examination would be
announced about 3 weeks prior to the commencement of the examination. Any
changes of dates, due to unavoidable circumstances, shall be intimated to students
through notice board and other media, adequately in advance.
C. Modes of Examination
i) Mode of Written examination:
Each student presenting himself at the examination shall be supplied with the question
paper and he/she shall have to write the answers in the answer book supplied by
14
the Institute.
ii) Mode of Practical, Oral, Project / Seminar Examinations: The internal and/or external
examiners appointed by the Institute shall conduct these examinations, as applicable
according to the teaching and examination schemes of the curricula. Further, the mode
of conduct of these examinations shall be as decided by the Institute from time to
time.
D. Courses at an Examination
Examination shall be held in the courses mentioned in Teaching and Examination
Scheme of the related curriculum prescribed by the Institute for that term.
E. Curriculum for Courses at an Examination
The curriculum for each course (of the course) at the examination shall indicate the
detailed contents of study prescribed. The copy of curricula shall be available on
institute’s web site, department office and examination section.
F. Medium of Examination
Students appearing for an examination of the Institute shall have to write and
communicate answers to the questions in written or oral examinations, through the
medium of English language only.
G. Permission for writer
i) Permission for writer would be granted to a student only if he is physically
unable to write the answers and has been medically so certified, at the time of
examination.
ii) Any physical disability, which existed during course of study, shall not be considered
as valid reason for permitting a writer.
iii) The writer so permitted shall be less qualified than the student. Further, the
writer shall not be a relative. The Head of the Institute shall ascertain this fact.
iv) Change of writer: Changing the permitted writer is not allowed. If a change is
necessary in exceptional circumstances, the officer-in- charge, examination, may
permit the change, after ascertaining that the new writer also satisfies the conditions
applicable for a writer as mentioned in (iii) above
v) For obtaining permission for writer, the student or his parents shall apply to the
Institute in writing along with medical certificate and supporting documents issued by a
registered medical practitioner.
vi) The institute would make separate seating arrangement for such disabled student
and the writer. The student and the writer, both shall be present together, during the
sessions of the examination.
vii) Use of writer shall be limited to writing answers of theory papers only, and shall
exclude drawing/graphics, and courses wherein the motor skill of the student has to be
tested.
viii) Further, the student permitted to use writer shall not be allowed to write or draw
anything. Occurrence of any such event shall be considered as misconduct on the part
of the student and he shall be liable for disciplinary action.
H. Allowance / concession of extra time to disabled student
Physically disabled or physically handicapped student shall be allowed a concession of
extra time of 30 minutes for duration of examination of three clock hours and of
proportionate time for examinations of lesser or more duration on production of due
medical certificate from competent authority.
I. Concession to students with learning disability.
Student with learning disability due to dyslexia, dysgraphia or dyscalculia, supported by
15
due medical certificate, shall be eligible for following facilities / concessions.
Facility of a writer in a manner stipulated under ‘Permission for Writer’.
ii) Concession of extra time of 15 minutes for a theory paper of 1 hour duration and 30
minutes for paper of duration of 2 hours or more for writing examination.
iii) Concession of maximum 20 marks to a failing student for passing. This concession
may be given in any one or more courses without exceeding the limit of total 20 marks of
that semester.
iv) If a student needs concession in more than one course and total such concession
exceeds maximum limit of 20 marks for that specific semester, then the student shall be
asked for his/her option. Based on the option the concession shall be granted.
v) If a student after getting concession does not pass in all courses and also does not
exhaust maximum limit of 20 marks in a particular semester; remaining marks shall be
made available as a concession for passing in remaining courses of that semester in
subsequent attempts.
RULE – 14: Re-Examination
A Re-examination shall be conducted for the last conducted term within one month from
declaration of ESE result for students failing in regular End Semester Examination. The
re-exam for odd term (I, III and V) shall be conducted in Dec/Jan after the regular exam of
odd term and the re-exam for even term (II, IV and VI) shall be conducted in May/June
after the regular exam of even term. No additional examinations for odd term shall be
conducted at the end of even term and vice versa. The forms for re-exam shall be filled
by the failing students as per the notice issued by Diploma exam section after the
declaration of ESE results. The detailed timetable of reexamination would be
announced about 1 week prior to the commencement of examination. All other rules of
Rule 13 (A to I) are applicable for reexamination.
RULE - 15: Penalty for acts of misconduct (ESE, Reexam and IST)
In any examination of the Institute , if it is found that a student is or has been guilty of
misbehavior or misconduct including breach of any of the rules laid down for the proper
conduct of examination or has been found to have copied or attempted to copy or used or
attempted to use unfair means at an examination and if the misconduct is detected during
the examination, unless he/she is caught, with positive evidence of copying material
brought from outside or for gross misbehavior, he/she will not be expelled from the
examination and he/she be provisionally permitted to appear for the remaining/full
examination by the Officer-in charge of the examination by substituting fresh answer
books after obtaining an undertaking in writing from him/her. The Officer-in-charge /
Supervisor shall then make a report in this respect to the Controller of Examination
(COE). The Controller of Examination (COE) shall on receipt of such a report or when he
comes to know and is convinced of such misconduct on the part of student, shall place
such a case(s) before the Unfair means committee of the Institute. The Director shall
have the power to cancel the result of the student of the examination at which he/she
appeared and also exclude him/her from subsequent examination / training for such a
specified period as the Unfair means committee may recommend. However, in case of
permanent expulsion prior concurrence of the Board of Governance will be necessary.
The student whose result is thus cancelled and who is further excluded from the
examination/training for a specified period shall be eligible to re-register to the same
semester examination; after the expiry of the period for which he/she is debarred, if
he/she is otherwise eligible. For IST, an internal committee comprising of COE Diploma,
Dean Diploma, Department exam coordinator and Diploma Head of respective
department shall be constituted to look into the unfair means case during IST.
RULE – 16: Punishment norms for unfair means (ESE, Reexam and IST)
16
Sr.
No. Name of Malpractice Quantum of Punishment
1 Communicating or talking to another Cancellation of the result / performance of the guilty
student examinee in the course/s during whose examination
he/she was caught.
2 Student found copying from copying Cancellation of full performance in all courses of the
material during examination period. concerned semester in which caught copying (Regular
or Repeater exam).
3 Student found in possession of a) Cancellation of the result / performance of the
copying material but not copied guilty examinee in the course/s during whose
a) Same course examination he/she was caught.
b) other b) No punishment, but oral warning and
undertaking is sought
4 Student found exchanging answer Cancellation of performance of the guilty examinee in
books, slip of paper etc with other the current examination/s plus debarment from
student appearing in the next one examination.
5 Cases of mass copying reported by Result of examinee/s involved is to be withheld for
examiner at assessment centers. conducting inquiry. Punishment shall be awarded as
deemed after the scrutiny of enquiry report.
6 Possessing Mobile phones or a) Cancellation of full performance in all courses of
equivalent devises, in working the concerned semester in which caught copying
condition or otherwise, while (Regular or Repeater exam).
appearing for examination in b) Cancellation of the result / performance of the
examination hall guilty examinee in the course during whose
a) used for copying purpose examination he/she was caught. Return of
b) not used mobile after declaration of result
7 Student found with answer book Result of examinee/s involved is to be withheld for
having two hand writings- one self conducting inquiry. Punishment shall be awarded as
and another different than self. deemed after the scrutiny of enquiry report.
8 Smuggling out and / or in of answer Result of examinee/s involved is to be withheld for
books and forging of signature of conducting inquiry. Punishment shall be awarded as
supervisor deemed after the scrutiny of enquiry report.
9 Impersonation (i) a) Cancellation of the performance in present
(i) Student who impersonates examination/s plus debarment of the guilty
examinee from appearing in the next three
examinations provided he is a bonafide student of the
Institute.
b) Matter should be communicated to the employer of
the impersonating examinee, provided he is employed
and not a bonafide student of the Institute.
c) In case the examinee is unemployed and is a student
undergoing education with examination authority other
than the Institute; the information should be given in
writing to the concerned examination authority.
(ii) Cancellation of the performance of such examinee
(ii) Student for whom impersonate is in current full examination plus debarment from
noted appearing in the next three examinations.
10 Any other cases not covered above All such cases to be kept before the unfair means
but found violating examination committee and to be dealt with on case to case basis.
ethics.
For any kind of malpractice observed during the test, the said test of the course will stand null
and void and the student will not be allowed to appear for make-up test of that course.
______________________________________________________________________
17
SECTION 7: RESULT PROCESSING
RULE - 17: Standard for passing
A. To pass an examination, a student must obtain a minimum of 40% of the
aggregate marks separately in each head of a course i.e. 1) Practical / Oral, 2)
Term work, 3) ESE and 4) Theory paper (i.e. ESE + IST), as mentioned in
Teaching and Examination scheme. Fraction of a mark less than 0.5 will be
ignored and 0.5 & above will be rounded to next digit.
B. The marks under head ‘Theory’ shall be an aggregate of
i) marks of written examination in Theory paper plus
ii) marks obtained in IST as per RULE 12
C. To pass a theory course examination a student must obtain a minimum marks
required for passing as per the scheme of that course. There shall be no minimum
marks for passing in tests.
RULE - 18: Declaration of result
The examination results shall be declared by the Examination section as soon as practicable,
after the completion of an examination. The provisional result shall be declared by
examination section after approval from the Director VJTI and will be followed by
confirmation from examination committee.
A. Result Status
The result of a student shall fall into one of the following status categories. The
status categories are applicable as per teaching and examination scheme for a particular
course.
• I DST (First Class with Distinction): Students passing in all course heads and
securing minimum 75% or above, of total marks shall fall in this category.
• I (First Class): Students passing in all course heads and securing minimum 60% or more
but less than 75% of total marks shall fall in this category.
• II (Second Class): Students passing in all course heads and securing minimum 45% or
more but less than 60% of total marks shall fall in this category.
• Pass (Pass Class): Students passing in all course heads and securing minimum 40% or
more but less than 45% of total marks shall fall in this category.
• ATKT (Allowed To Keep Term): Students awarded ATKT status as per prevailing rules,
shall fall in this category
• WFLS (Withheld, Failed in lower semester): Students passing final semester
examination but failing in lower semester/(s) examination shall fall in this category.
• Fail: Students failing to secure minimum passing marks in number of course heads
more than those prescribed for award of ATKT as per RULE 3 or minimum
percentage of aggregate marks shall fall in this category.
B. Abbreviations
The certificate of marks issued to the students and examination Gazette may contain some of
the following abbreviations:
i. TH: Theory
ii. OR: Oral
iii. PR: Practical
18
iv. TW: Term Work
v. @: Condoned marks
vi. * Failure marks
vii. #: Carry forward Marks
viii. AB: Absent
ix. EX: Exemption
x. WFLS: Result Withheld, Failed in Lower Semester
xi. RHR: Results Held in Reserve
xii. CON: Condoned
xiii. ATKT: Allowed to keep term
xiv. DN: Distinction
xv. $: Passed in an equivalent course
xv. + : Grace
xvi. ++ : Dyslexia
C. Results Held in Reserve (RHR)
If the result of a student is held in reserve for want of any marks or information, such
result shall be declared on obtaining such information.
D. Processing Adversely Affected Result before Its Declaration
When the result of an examination is found to have been adversely affected before
declaration, either on account of unexpectedly large number of failures in a course/s due to
the question paper/s being set beyond the scope of the Curriculum or on account of
error, malpractice, fraud, improper conduct of examination or any other matter, such
matter shall be placed before the Internal Academic and Examination Committee ( IAEC) for
its consideration and recommendations for further course of action in this behalf.
E. Allotment of abnormally high or low internal marks:
In case it is revealed that the students have been allotted abnormally high or low internal
assessment marks, such cases shall be placed before the IAEC for Its recommendations
to the extent of modifying the marks in proportion to the average marks of the whole class
in the related theory paper or all theory papers (in case the related course of the internal
assessment does not have theory paper for the examination) of that examination,
secured by the class, limited to the minimum marks for passing and consequent
amendment in the result shall be effected.
F. Amendment in Declared Results
In case, the declared result of an examination is later found affected by an error
(except those covered under malpractice, fraud or improper conduct); the matter shall be
placed before a committee comprising of Dean-Diploma, COE Diploma and one Diploma
Head for further decision. After six months, the matter shall be placed before IAEC for
scrutiny followed by approval from Director.
G. Amendment in the Declared Result Owing to Misconduct
If the result of a student has been declared and later it is found that such result had
been affected through malpractice, fraud or other misconduct, irrespective of whether
the student has benefited by it or not, and that such student, in the opinion of the
Controller of Examination, has partly or fully participated in such malpractice, fraud or
misconduct, all such cases shall be placed before Unfair means committee for further
course of action as per RULE-16 with final approval from Director.
19
H. Implementation of the amended result by the institute
The Controller of Examination shall get the result gazette duly corrected as per
amendment. The Controller of Examination shall further, exchange the issued mark sheet
and the diploma certificate with the revised ones, as the case may be, from the student.
RULE – 19: Grace marks
A. For Course
A maximum of two marks for ESE paper or three marks in the aggregate marks of theory (i.e.
ESE plus test) will be granted to enable the student to pass in the theory paper e.g. in the
case of paper of 80 marks of theory and 20 marks of test, the result will be declared as
follows:
Case No. 1 2 3 4
ESE Marks (80) 29 30 31 32
Test Marks (20) 20 07 06 05
Total (100) 49 37 37 37
Result Fail Pass Pass Pass
 The result of Case no.1, 29+(3) not allowed, hence “Fail"
 The result of Case No.2 will be 30+(2)+07=39+(1)=40= “Pass”
 The result of Case No.3 will be 31+(1)+06 = 38+(2)=40= ‘Pass”
 The result of Case No.4 will be 32+(0)+05=37+(3)=40=”Pass”
No grace marks will be awarded in case of Oral and Practical examination.
B. For Examination
If a student falls short of maximum half percent of the aggregate marks assigned (i.e.5
marks out of 1000, 4 marks out of 800 etc.) to obtain 75% (i.e. First Class with
Distinction) or 60% marks (i.e. First Class) or 50% marks (i.e. Second Class) such a
deficiency will be made up by adding maximum half percent marks assigned to the
examination to the total marks obtained by the student in an examination. In the
calculation of half percent of the aggregate marks, a fraction of 0.5 and above shall be
rounded to (the next) digit.
RULE - 20: Condonation
A. A student who fails to pass an examination by not more than 10 marks in not more
than two heads, viz. Theory and/or Practicals and/or Oral examination, will have the
deficiency in marks required for passing in these heads condoned; provided the
student has appeared for the full examination, has secured at least 50% marks in
aggregate, and deficiency in two heads are not more than 10 marks (6+4 or 5+5)
B. Theory / Practicals & or oral will be considered as separate head of passing for the
purpose of condonation of deficiency in marks. A student whose failure is condoned
under the regulations above will be eligible for class in the same way as other
successful students.
C. The total number of marks secured by a student receiving benefit of condonation,
under the above rule, will however remain unaltered and “CON” meaning
condonation will be shown against his/her name in the result sheet.
20
RULE - 21: Award of Class for Semester Examination
A. A student will be declared to have passed a semester examination in the First Class, if
he/she obtains 60% or more of the total marks, provided that he/she appears and
passes the examination in all the courses at one and the same sitting.
B. A student will be declared to have passed a semester examination in the Second
Class, if he/she obtains 50% or more but less than 60% of the total marks, provided
he/she appears and passes in all the courses at one and the same sitting.
C. A student will be declared to have passed the semester examination in Pass Class if
he/she obtains 40% or more but less than 50% of the total marks.
RULE - 22: Award of class for Diploma
A. i) For R-2013, Class for the Diploma course will be awarded based on % obtained
in ‘Award winning courses’ from semester III to VI irrespective of whether a student
clears award winning courses in single or more attempt.
ii) For R-2017, Class for the Diploma course will be awarded based on % obtained
in semester V and VI irrespective of whether a student clears award winning
courses in single or more attempt.
B. A student will be declared to have passed the Diploma examination leading to the
award of Diploma in First Class with Distinction if he/she obtains 75% or more of
aggregate marks as defined above in A.
C. Student will be declared to have passed the final examination leading to the award
of the Diploma in First Class if he / she obtains 60% or more but less than 75% of
the aggregate marks as defined above in A.
D. A student will be declared to have passed the final examination leading to the award
of the Diploma in Second Class if he/she obtains 50% or more but less than 60% of
the aggregate marks as defined above in A.
E. In all other cases a passed student will be declared to have passed the examination
in Pass Class as defined above in A.
RULE - 23: Carrying Forward Marks of Ex-students for Exemptions
For ex-students, the marks obtained in different heads of passing in the previous
examination of the same course in which he has passed, shall be carried forward for
deciding his total marks. Such students shall not be eligible for award of class in
semester mark sheet, except in mark sheet for the award of Diploma.
Marks obtained in class tests, practicals, term work will also be similarly carried
forward to the subsequent examination.
21
SECTION 8: POST EXAMINATION PROCEDURES
ITEM - 1: Showing of Assessed Answerbooks
ESE and Reexamination answerbooks will be shown to the respective students after
completion of assessment by the respective teachers in the week following the last paper
of the examination as per the schedule displayed on the notice board by the department.
Any discrepancies regarding totaling mistakes or un-assessed answers will be
addressed. Students absent for this activity will not be entertained later in any case.
ITEM - 2: Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Students dissatisfied with assessment of answer books shall submit a written application
to the Diploma Head of the respective department (Diploma awarding departments) the
very next working day after the assessed answer books are shown as per the schedule
displayed in advance. A three member Grievance Redressal Committee at department
level will be constituted by the Diploma Head of the respective department and the
decision of the Grievance Redressal Committee will be notified to the Controller of
Examination Diploma duly signed by the members of the committee. The student shall
not be shown answer books again after implementing the decision of grievance redressal
committee.
ITEM - 3: Issuing statement of marks
A. Original:
A student appearing for a semester examination of the Institute, after the
declaration of result; will obtain a certified statement of marks secured by him/her at
the semester examination. Marks secured by a student in individual question or
section of a paper will not be supplied.
B. Duplicate:
A duplicate statement of marks will be issued to a student in case of loss of the
same; on submission of affidavit from notary, on payment of prescribed fees and on
receipt of application from the student through the Head of the concerned
Department in which a student is studying or has studied.
ITEM - 4: Issuing statement of marks for award of diploma
A. Original:
A student who has passed VI semester examination will obtain a mark sheet for
VI semester and/or award of diploma along with VI semester mark sheet only after
passing all earlier semester examinations.
B. Duplicate:
A duplicate statement of marks for award of diploma will be issued to a student in
case of loss of same; on submission of affidavit stating the loss of original from
notary. The student shall submit an application to Controller of Examination through
the Head of the concerned Department in which studied and pay the prescribed fees.
ITEM - 5: Issuing Diploma Certificate
A. Original:
A student who has successfully completed all the semester examinations of the
course as prescribed will be awarded Diploma by V.J.T.I. in convocation Ceremony
held in the Institute. The student will be permitted to the Convocation Ceremony only
22
after he produces a 'No dues certificate' from all the concerned departments along
with a prescribed 'Convocation fee'.
B. Duplicate:
A duplicate Diploma Certificate ( including provisional passing certificate ) will be
issued to a student in case of loss of same, on submission of following: i) affidavit
from Notary/Magistrate on stamp paper of Rs.100/- OR a certificate from a Gazetted
Officer or Special Executive Magistrate stating that he/she knows the applicant, and
that the circumstances regarding the loss of the Diploma as indicated by the student
are known to him/her that the original Diploma issued to him/her is lost, ii) payment
of prescribed fees and iii) application from the student through the Head of the
concerned department.
ITEM - 6: Issuing Transcript
The institute shall issue on request along with prescribed fees, the transcript for semester
examination passed by a student.
ITEM - 7: Name correction on documents
The name of student appearing on his/her mark sheet must be as per certificate of
passing of the qualifying examination as well as S.S.C board Certificate. If there is
any correction in name, a student can apply for the same along with the original mark
sheet/Diploma certificate having corrections and get it corrected/rectified immediately
after the declaration of result. Name correction will not be entertained if reported after
the declaration of result of final semester.
23
SECTION 9: MISCELLANEOUS
ITEM - 8: Time limit for preservation of Assessed answer books
The answer books for an examination shall be preserved for three years after the
declaration of result of by the institute irrespective of whether a student appears for these
consecutive examinations or otherwise, except those concerned with ongoing court cases
and inquiry matters.
ITEM - 9: Retention period of documents
The examination documents shall be preserved till the declaration of result of next two
consecutive examinations held; unless otherwise the retention of document is mandatory
as an evidence for some enquiry and / or judicial purpose. The disposal after the
retention period shall be as per the guidelines prepared by the institute.
ITEM - 10: Time limit for completion of course
The student shall have to complete the course within 6 years from the date of admission
to the course. Thereafter he/she will be disqualified to continue the course.
___________________ _______________
Dean-Diploma Director
24
