“शैक्षणिक वर्ष सन 2020-21 पासनू अणिल भारतीय
तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या अित्याणरत असलल्े या
संस्थेतील प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका
अणभयांणत्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका
और्धणनमािशास्त्र, हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड के टररग
टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट
णितीय वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी
अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीच्या बदलांस मंजूरी
देण्याबाबत.....”
महाराष्ट्र शासन
उच्च व तंत्र णशक्षि णवभाग
शासन णनिषय क्रमाकं : मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/ताणं श-5
मंत्रालय णवस्तार भवन,
मंत्रालय, मंब ई -400 032
णदनांक : 22 ज लै, 2020
वाचा : 1. शासन णनिषय क्रमाकं , उच्च व तंत्र णशक्षि णवभाग मान्यता-2019/(77/19)/तांणश-5,
णदनांक 17 मे, 2019
2. सचं ालक, तंत्रणशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंब ई यांच ेक्रमांक
10/एनजीपी/कें द्रीभतू प्रवशे प्रणक्रया/पदणवका/2020/270, णदनांक 12 मे, 2020
प्रस्तावना :
शैक्षणिक वर्ष सन 2019-20 पासनू अणिल भारतीय तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या अित्याणरत असलेल्या
संस्थेतील प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका
और्धणनमािशास्त्र, हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड के टररग टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट णितीय
वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीस वर नम द णदनाकं 17 मे,
2019 च्या शासन णनिषयान्वये मान्यता देण्यात आलेली आहे.
तथाणप, कोणवड-19 च्या प्राद भावाम ळे व तद्न र्ंणगक झालेली टाळेबदं ी णवचारात घेऊन अणिल
भारतीय तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्द नवी णदल्ली यांनी जाहीर के लेल्या वळे ापत्रकान सार कें द्रीभतू प्रवशे प्रणक्रयेच्या
फे -या तसचे , कोणवड-19 चा प्राद भाव थांबणवण्यासाठीच्या उपाययोजना मध्ये सामाणजक अतं र रािि,े
णवद्याथी व पालकांची होिारी गदी टाळिे या महत्वाच्या सचू नांच ेपालन करिे आवश्यक आहे. त्याअन र्ंगाने,
शैक्षणिक वर् ष सन 2020-21 कणरता शासन मान्य पदणवका अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीत
आवश्यकतेन सार बदल करण्याचे वर नमूद णदनाकं 12 मे, 2020 च्या पत्रान्वये तंत्रणशक्षि संचालनालयाने
प्रस्ताणवत के लेल े आहे. त्यान सार, अणिल भारतीय तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या अित्याणरत असलेल्या सस्ं थेतील
प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका
और्धणनमािशास्त्र, हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड के टररग टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट णितीय
वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीमध्ये सध ारिा करण्याची बाब
शासनाच्या णवचाराधीन होती.
शासन णनिषय :
शैक्षणिक वर्ष सन 2020-21 पासनू अणिल भारतीय तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या अित्याणरत असलेल्या
संस्थेतील प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
और्धणनमािशास्त्र , हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड के टररग टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट णितीय
वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयांणत्रकी अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीत [Maharashtra State
Technical Diploma Courses Educational Institutions(Admission) Rules, 2019] सोबत जोडलेल्या
णववरिपत्रामध्ये नमूद के ल्याप्रमािे सध ारिा करण्यात येत आहे.
2. सदर प्रवशे णनयमावलीच्या सध ारिेस सचं ालक, तंत्रणशक्षि संचालनालय यांनी आवश्यक ती प्रणसद्धी
द्यावी.
3. सदर शासन णनिषय महाराष्ट्र शासनाच्या www.maharashtra.gov.in या संके तस्थळावर उपलब्ध
करण्यात आला असून त्याचा संके तांक 202007221553157808 असा आहे. हा आदेश णडजीटल स्वाक्षरीन े
साक्षाकं ीत करून काढण्यात येत आहे.
महाराष्ट्राचे राज्यपाल यांच्या आदेशान सार व नावाने,
( अ. र. काटकर )
सोबत : णववरिपत्र कायासन अणधकारी, महाराष्ट्र शासन
प्रणत,
1. संचालक, तंत्रणशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंब ई-01
2. संचालक, महाराष्ट्र राज्य तंत्रणशक्षि मंडळ, बांद्रा, मंब ई 400051
3. सव ष सहसचं ालक, णवभागीय तंत्रणशक्षि कायालय (मंब ई, पि े, नाणशक, औरंगाबाद, अमरावती,
नागपरू )
4. णनवड नस्ती (तांणश-5).
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 2
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
शासन णनिषय क्र.मान्यता-२०२०/(प्र.क्र.३९/२०)/ तांणश-५, णदनांक-२२/0७/२०२० सोबतच ेणववरिपत्र
Maharashtra State Technical Diploma Courses Educational Institutions (Admissions) Rules, 2019 -
Government resolution शासन णनिषय क्र.मान्यता-२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
amended as below
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
1 5(1) (A)(a) (a) For First Year Post SSC Diploma (a) For First Year Post SSC Diploma
Courses, - Candidates passing Courses, - Candidates passing
Std. VIII, IX and SSC from a Std. SSC from a recognized
recognized institution in institution in Maharashtra
Maharashtra State. State.
2 5(1) (E)(a) (a) For First Year Post SSC (a) For First Year Post SSC
Diploma Courses,- Candidate Diploma Courses,- Candidate
passing Std. VIII, IX and SSC from a passing Std. SSC from a
recognized institution located in a recognized institution located in
disputed Maharashtra Karnataka a disputed Maharashtra
Border area or from Maharashtra, Karnataka Border area or from
residing in the disputed Maharashtra, residing in the
Maharashtra Karnataka Border disputed Maharashtra Karnataka
area and also whose mother Border area and also whose
tongue is Marathi. mother tongue is Marathi.
3 7(4)(a)(iv) --Not Present-- (iv) Any vacant seat in a given
Course, out of 1/ 3 rd seats
reserved for Children of Indian
Workers in the Gulf Countries
shall be reverted to the seats
of 2/ 3rd meant for OCI, PIO,
Foreign Nationals and vice-versa.
Further, any vacant seat in the
Foreign Nationals (FN), Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI), Persons of
Indian Origin (PIO), Children of
Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
quota may be filled with NRI
Candidature Candidates, subject
to the approval from appropriate
authority for the NRI seats.
4 9(1)(d) (d) Document Verification at (d) Document Verification at
Facilitation Centre by the Facilitation Centre by the
Candidate. It is mandatory on the Candidate through the method
candidate’s part to produce all prescribed by the Competent
original documents in support of Authority for this purpose. It is
the claim made in the application mandatory on the candidate’s
form; part to produce all original
documents in support of the claim
made in the application form;
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 3
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
5 9(1)(e) (e) Display or publishing of (e) Display or publishing of
provisional merit lists, provisional merit lists,
submission of grievances, if any, submission of grievances, if any,
and display or publishing of final through the method prescribed
merit lists; by the Competent Authority for
this purpose and display or
publishing of final merit lists;
6 9(1)(i) (i) Reporting and accepting the (i) Reporting and accepting the
offered seat at Admission offered seat at Admission
Reporting Centre by the Reporting Centre by the
Candidate as per the schedule Candidate as per the schedule
declared by the Competent declared by the Competent
Authority; Authority through the method
prescribed by the Competent
Authority for the purpose of
accepting the offered seat and
removal of errors as per the
clause (e) of sub rule(4) of this
rule;
7 9(4)(a) (4) Conduct of CAP Round-II and (4) Conduct of CAP Round-II.- (a)
III.- (a) The seats available for The seats available for Round
Rounds II and III shall be II shall be published on the
published on the website. The website. The Candidates
Candidates eligible for eligible for round II are allowed
respective rounds II and III are to fill in and/or edit online
allowed to fill in and/or edit option form filled in by the
online option form filled in by candidate for the previous
the candidate for the previous round. The seats to be allotted
round. The seats to be allotted during this round shall be
during these rounds shall be available to the eligible
available to the eligible candidates falling under the
candidates falling under the following categories. -
following categories. (i) Candidates as per the
(i) Candidates as per the sub-rule 3(c) and 3(d)
sub-rule 3(c) and 3(d) above;
above; (ii) Candidates who have
(ii) Candidates who have not been allotted any
not been allotted any seat in the previous
seat in any of the round;
previous rounds; (iii) Candidates who did not
(iii) Candidates who did not participate (failure of
participate (failure of filling option form) in
filling option form) in previous round.
previous rounds.
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 4
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
8 9(4)(c) (c) There shall be no further (c) There shall be no further
betterment option available to the betterment option available to the
candidate after round III. The candidate after round II. The
allotment made and/or allotment allotment made and/or allotment
retained in round III for retained in round II for
participating candidates in round III participating candidates in round II
shall be final; shall be final;
9 9(4)(f) (f) In case of additional round, if ------------Deleted----------
any, the category of candidates
mentioned in clause (a) above shall
be entitled to participate and will
be entitled to fill in fresh option
Form. In such case, the candidate
need not fill in the previously
allotted preference in their
preference list. Once the upward
allotment is made, the earlier
allotment shall stand automatically
cancelled. In the event no such
upward preference is allotted in
this round, the candidate’s
previous allotment stands retained.
10 10(1) (a) (e) Persons with Disability Category (e) Allotment to the Persons with
Stage-I (e) Candidates shall be considered Disability Category Candidates
for allotment of the seat 1. Allotment to the Persons with
reserved for them in their Disability Category
respective category, as per Candidates shall be within
their Inter-Se-Merit and if seat their respective Reserved/
in their respective reserve General category only.
Category is not available, then 2. The number of seats for the
he shall be considered for Persons with Disability
allotment in Open Category as Category Candidates shall be
per their Inter-Se- Merit. indicated in total number for
the specific course as per the
seats available in the CAP for
that course.
3. If the seat for Persons with
Disability Category Candidates
as per their prescribed
reservation percentage within
their respective reserved/
general category comes out to
be complete integer (no
rounding off the fractional
value is permissible) then only
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 5
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
such seat shall be earmarked
as reserved for that particular
reserved/ General category for
Persons with Disability
candidate and shall be allotted
as per their Inter-Se-Merit.
4. All other seats (except
earmarked seats), available for
Persons with Disability
Category Candidates for that
course shall be allotted as per
their Inter-Se-Merit from
combined list of all Persons
with Disability Category
Candidates.
Provided that, not more than
one seat shall be filled in from
same reserved category as per
their Inter-Se-Merit.
Provided further that, the
candidate not considered for
allotment due to provision of
above proviso, shall be
considered for allotment of
seat from general seats for
Persons with Disability
Category as per their Inter-Se-
Merit
5. After allotment of the seat to
Person with Disability Category
Candidate a seat from that
General or respective
backward class category and
Person with Disability Category
shall be treated as utilized.
6. If in the seat matrix for any
course, total available seats for
Reserved / General category
comes out to be less than 2,
then in such case no seat shall
be allotted to the Person with
Disability Category Candidate.
11 10(1) (a) (f) Defence Category Candidates (f) Allotment to the Defence
Stage-I (f) shall be considered for Category Candidates
allotment of the seats reserved 1. Allotment to the Defence
for them in their respective Category Candidates shall be
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 6
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
Category as per their Inter Se- within their respective
Merit and if seat in their Reserved/ General category
respective reserve Category is only.
not available then he shall be 2. The number of seats for the
considered for allotment in Defence Category Candidates
Open Category as per their shall be indicated in total
Inter-Se-Merit number for the specific
course as per the seats
available in the CAP for that
course.
3. If the seat for Defence
Category Candidates as per
their prescribed reservation
percentage within their
respective reserved/general
category comes out to be
complete integer (no
rounding off the fractional
value is permissible) then
only such seat shall be
earmarked as reserved for
that particular reserved/
General category for Defence
candidate and shall be
allotted as per their Inter-Se-
Merit.
4. All other seats (except
earmarked seats), available
for Defence Category
Candidates for that course
shall be allotted as per their
Inter-Se-Merit from
combined list of all Defence
Category Candidates.
Provided that, not
more than one seat shall be
filled in from same reserved
category as per their Inter-
Se-Merit.
Provided further
that, the candidate not
considered for allotment due
to provision of above proviso,
shall be considered for
allotment of seat from
general seats for Defence
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 7
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
Category as per their Inter-
Se-Merit
5. After allotment of the seat to
Defence Category Candidates
a seat from that General or
respective backward class
category and Defence
Category shall be treated as
utilized.
6. If in the seat matrix for any
course, total available seats
for Reserved / General
category comes out to be less
than 2, then in such case no
seat shall be allotted to the
Defence Category Candidate.
12 11 and 11(1) 11. Allotment of seats by CAP 11. Allotment of seats by CAP
Rounds I, II and III.- Rounds I and II.-
(1) CAP Round I, II, and III shall be (1) CAP Round I and II shall be
conducted by computerized conducted by computerized
allotment. allotment.
13 11(3) (3) In CAP Round II.-
(a) for Minority Institutions, the
allotment shall be given to the
candidates as per following
preference, - -------------Deleted--------------
(i) Stage I of sub-rule (2) of rule 10,
(ii) Stages I to IV of sub-rule (1) of
rule 10,
(iii) Stage II of sub-rule (2) of rule
10;
(b) for other than Minority
Institutions, the allotment shall be
given to the candidates as per
Stages I to IV of sub-rule (1) of rule
10 of these Rules.
14 11(4) (4) In CAP Round III.- (4) In CAP Round II.-
(a) for Minority Institutions, the (a) for Minority Institutions, the
allotment shall be given to the allotment shall be given to the
candidates as per following candidates as per following
preference, - preference, -
(i) Stage I of sub-rule (2) of rule 10, (i) Stage I of sub-rule (2) of rule
10,
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 8
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
(ii) Stages I to V of sub-rule (1) of (ii) Stages I to V of sub-rule (1) of
rule 10, rule 10,
(iii) Stage II of sub-rule (2) of rule (iii) Stage II of sub-rule (2) of rule
10; 10;
(b) for other than Minority (b) for other than Minority
Institutions, the allotment shall be Institutions, the allotment shall be
given to the candidates as given to the candidates as per
per Stages I to V of sub-rule (1) of Stages I to V of sub-rule (1) of rule
rule 10 of these Rules 10 of these Rules
15 11(6) (6) Every stage in CAP Round I, II (6) Every stage in CAP Round I and
and III shall be executed with HD II shall be executed with HD and
and OHD tag and if the seats OHD tag and if the seats remain
remain vacant then the same stage vacant then the same stage shall
shall be executed without HD and be executed without HD and OHD
OHD tag. If further seats remain tag. If further seats remain vacant
vacant for any reason in rule 7(1) for any reason in rule 7(1) and
and 7(2) of these Rules they shall 7(2) of these Rules they shall be
be considered for allotment to all considered for allotment to all the
the candidates as per rule 5(1) candidates as per rule 5(1)
irrespective of the seat type on the irrespective of the seat type on
basis of Inter Se-Merit. the basis of Inter Se-Merit.
16 12(a) (a) Allotment in CAP Rounds I, II (a) Allotment in CAP Rounds I and
and III of Home District Seats, II of Home District Seats, Other
Other than Home District seats and than Home District seats and State
State Level seats will be carried out Level seats will be carried out as
as per Inter-Se-Merit of Candidates per Inter-Se-Merit of Candidates
having Maharashtra State having Maharashtra State
Candidature. The seats will be Candidature. The seats will be
allotted to Candidates as per Inter allotted to Candidates as per Inter
Se-Merit, options filled and seats Se-Merit, options filled and seats
available at that point of time in available at that point of time in
the stage of CAP Rounds I, II and III. the stage of CAP Rounds I and II.
17 13(i) --Not Present-- i) While filling these seats the
13(j) preference shall be given to
Maharashtra State
Candidature Candidate over
All India Candidature
Candidate on the basis of
Inter-Se-Merit.
j) After exhausting Maharashtra
State Candidature Candidate
and All India Candidature
Candidate if any seat remain
vacant in the Sanctioned
Intake then these seats may
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 9
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
be filled with NRI, Foreign
Nationals (FN), Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI), Persons
of Indian Origin (PIO), Children
of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries (CIWGC)
Candidature Candidate,
subject to the approval from
appropriate authority for
these seats.
18 16(6) (6) In case of progressive closure of Deleted
the Course or Institution, it is
mandatory for the Institution to
continue the course till the
completion of the course duration.
In such case of progressive closure,
no candidate shall be eligible for
transfer and the provisions in sub –
rule (1) and (2) of this rule shall not
be applicable.
Provided that, the Candidates
becoming eligible for admission
after the course or institute is
closed shall be eligible for transfer
of course or Institution, if he is
otherwise fulfill the eligibility for
admission as specified by the
concerned Board/University or
Institution to which the candidate
seeks admission.
19 Schedule IV 1.1 Reservation for Socially, 1.1 Reservation for Socially,
(Reservations) Educationally & Economically Educationally & Economically
Backward Class Candidates: Backward Class Candidates:
Sr. Category of % of Sr. Category of % of
No reservation reservati No reservation reservati
on on
8. Socially and 16.0 8. Socially and 12.0
Educationally Educationally
Backward Backward
Classes (SEBC) Classes (SEBC)
Total 66.0 Total 62.0
20 Schedule IV 1.4 Reservation for sons / 1 .4 Reservation for sons /
(Reservations) daughters of Defence Service daughters of Defence Service
Personnel - Five per cent (5%) of the Personnel - Five per cent (5%) of the
seats available under Centralized seats available under Centralized
admission process in each admission process in each
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 10
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता -2020/(प्र.क्र.39/20)/तांणश-5
Existing Rules in
शासन णनिषय क्र.
Sr. Rule No in Modified as /
मान्यता -२०१९/(प्र.क्र.७७/१९)/तांणश-५,
No (2019) newly added / Deleted
णदनांक १७ मे २०१९
Polytechnic, subject to a maximum Polytechnic, shall be reserved for
of five (5) seats, shall be reserved children of active/Ex defence service
for children of active/Ex defence personnel. These seats are within
service personnel. These seats are the sanctioned intake capacity for
within the sanctioned intake the course. These seats shall be
capacity for the course. These seats filled by the Competent Authority
shall be filled by the Competent through CAP as per the policies of
Authority through CAP as per the the Government declared from time
policies of the Government declared to time. This reservation is not
from time to time. This reservation available to the children of civilian
is not available to the children of staff who is working/ who has
civilian staff who is working/ who worked with the Indian Defence
has worked with the Indian Defence Services.
Services.
21 Rules Jammu and Kashmir Union Territory of Jammu and
including Kashmir and Ladakh
term
“Jammu and
Kashmir” in
the GR
+++
पृष्ट्ठ 11 पैकी 11
