AICTE AURA 2024 (Augmenting Utilization of Research Assets)
Scheme Guidelines
1.1 Introduction:
(a) Genesis & objective of the Scheme:
The Government of India has been making investment in research and development
infrastructure through different ministries or departments and has created excellent
infrastructure that is spread across the country in premier educational institutions and
national laboratories. Through pioneering efforts of the Office of Principal Scientific
Advisor (OPSA), an India Science Technology Engineering Facilities Map (I-STEM)
Portal has been established, towards enhancing the utilization of public-funded
infrastructure.
It is proposed to initiate a scheme from AICTE that prompts and promotes utilization
of I-STEM, by providing financial support to teachers and students in AICTE
approved colleges to make use of the facilities and conduct research.
This initiative to augment existing research being conducted by the faculty members/
PG Scholarship Students/ ADF Fellowship Students and QIP Scheme Students of
AICTE and all students of Diploma, U.G, P.G studying in AICTE approved
institutions.
(b) Targeted Output:
● Upskilling researchers to handle various cutting edge research
methodologies.
● Enlarged pool of researchers experienced in different domains.
● Publications/ Patents/Technical Papers from AICTE approved institutions
(c) Targeted Outcome:
● Utilization of public funded hardware and software R&D facilities mapped
by I-STEM.
● Building a culture for research in technical education institutions
● Generation of new knowledge/ technology through the efforts of researchers
by exploring and venturing out into disciplines.
(d) Anticipated Impact:
● Boost for research and mobility of researchers.
● Identification of new areas and competent researchers for further funding by
other agencies.
1.2 Eligibility:
(a) Full-time/ regular faculty of AICTE approved institutions
(b) Students of PG Scholarship scheme/ADF scheme/QIP Scheme of AICTE.
(c) All students of Diploma/ U.G/ PG of AICTE approved Institutions can also get the
benefit of AICTE AURA scheme after getting verified and forwarded by their Head
of the Institution (HOI).
There will be no age limit to avail the benefits of the scheme.
(d) This scheme can be availed maximum two times in a faculty/ students career.
1.3 Duration of the Project:
Duration of project will be of two years.
1.4 Project Funding:
An amount of up to Rs. 2 lakhs would be reimbursed to the researcher to take up a
research after submitting the payment receipt for utilization of equipment/ facilities
registered on I-STEM Portal.
1.5 Limit of Funding:
Maximum limit of funding is Rs. 2 lakhs, to the researchers.
1.6 Reimbursement of the Funds :
Bills should be submitted on a half yearly basis for reimbursement during the
financial year from April to September (before 31st October) and October to March
(before 30th April). The reimbursement will be made maximum twice in a year. The
payment will be released online through RTGS/ NEFT directly to the researcher’s
bank account.
1.7 Performance Indicators of the Scheme:
● Utilization of I-STEM on boarded public infrastructure
● Number of faculty funded
● Number of students got benefited
● Settlement of all submitted bills on time.
1.8 Scheme Implementation & Monitoring Portal:
Portal will be developed for receiving application for reimbursement of the bills.
