अखिल भारतीय तकनीकी शिक्षा पररषद
All India Council for Technical Education
AICTE SAMARTHAN
Internship Connect
Scheme
Document
Benefits of Internships
Hands-on Experience
Skill Development
Networking Opportunities
Exposure to Innovation
Career Exploration
AICTE SAMARTHAN: INTERNSHIP CONNECT
AICTE Internship for students of Jammu, Kashmir, Ladakh, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands & North Eastern States in Institutions of excellence and
national importance (IITs, IIMs, IIITs, IISERS, NITs, NITTTRs, and IHMs):
Mainstreaming of Jammu, Kashmir, Ladakh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands & North
Eastern youth is the priority of Government of India. All India Council for Technical
Education (AICTE) has signed MoUs with IITs, IIMs, IIITs, IISERS, NITs, NITTTRs,
and IHMs to provide internship opportunity to students of domicile of Jammu,
Kashmir, Ladakh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands & North Eastern states.
INTERNSHIP
The internship in these premier institutes are devised for a period of 15 days in on-
campus mode. During the internship period, the interns will undergo lecture
sessions, hands on training, exposure to the academic environment of these premier
institutes, interactions with the students, teachers and alumni, exposure to the
incubation/ innovation centres and projects.
WHO CAN APPLY
Undergraduate and Postgraduate Students of Jammu, Kashmir, Ladakh, Andaman
and Nicobar Islands & North Eastern states domicile, studying Engineering &
Technology, Management, Design, Applied Arts and Crafts, BBA, BCA, Hotel
Management & Catering Technology in AICTE approved institution, are eligible to
apply.
HOW TO APPLY
In order to apply follow the following procedure:
Step 1: The Nodal Officer registers on the portal with the Nomination Letter.
Step 2: AICTE verifies the Nomination.
Step 3: Once the nomination is verified, students can register themselves on the
portal.
Step 4: The student registration is then authenticated by the TPO (Training and
Placement Officer) or Nodal Officer.
Step 5: After successful authentication, the student can apply for the internship.
Some important points:
• Students can register themselves in the AICTE SAMARTHAN portal in
AICTE Website. Students need to provide their personal details, Aadhaar
details, academic credentials of their 10th, 12th, Diploma and Graduation,
choice of preferred institute for internship etc., in the portal.
• They have to also submit a bona-fide certificate from head of the institution
while Registration.
• The institute may nominate Training & Placement Officer/ Senior
faculty/Principal or Director as nodal officers for the internship Scheme.
Format for the nomination letter is available in the portal.
• The Nodal officer will register on the J & K Internship portal with a nomination
letter from the institute. The nodal officer will verify and authenticate students
of their institute.
• Only those students, who are authenticated by the nodal officers of their
institutes will be considered for internship.
Note: A student can participate in a maximum of three internships during their
undergraduate program and two internships during their postgraduate program.
SELECTION PROCESS AND CRITERIA
For the applications authenticated by the nodal officers. AICTE will create a rank list
under 02 Categories as follows:
• Rank List for UG- Based on the UG and 12th Score
• Rank List for PG- Based on the PG and UG Score
Note: For cases of same scores, scores of their immediate lower grades will be
considered for preparing the rank list. For example, if the 12th scores are equal, their
10th score will be taken in deciding the seniority in the rank list. If both the scores
are equal, then elder candidate in terms of date of birth as per Aadhaar credentials
will be given seniority.
Allotment System:
• Based on the created rank list, institute preferences given by the students and
number of seats available in those institutes for internship, the allotment list
will be finalized.
• If preference 1 is not available, then possibility for allotting preference 2 will
be examined.
• The exercise will continue till all seats in all institutes are filled.
• Probability of getting the internship will depend upon the institute preferences
given by the students and the number of seats available in those institutes.
• Allotment letters will be issued by email to the individual email ids of the
students upon successful selection.
• The student not responding to the choice allotted in the first round with in the
given time frame will be summarily rejected automatically and seats will be
allocated to another student in second round.
Note: Any representations/grievances will not be entertained on cases of
non-response from candidates in allotted seats.
JOINING:
• All students who were issued allotment letters, are expected to approach the
allotted host institution within the timeline given in the allotment letter. The
internship will be cancelled if student doesn’t join the institute before the last
date given.
• All Shortlisted Candidates need to submit a copy of following document at the
host institute.
o Printout of the allotment letter attested by the head of the institute.
o Bonafide/No Objection Certificate from your College.
o Photocopy of Aadhar Card.
o 10th mark sheet.
o 12th/Diploma mark sheet.
o UG Final Year mark sheet if applicable.
o Printout of PM-USPY allotment letter if you are not studying in
Jammu/Kashmir/Ladakh.
FUNDING:
• Food and Accommodation for the interns are free of cost and will be arranged
in the hostel/hostels of the Host Institute. The expenses will be reimbursed by
AICTE to the host institute @ Rs. 500/person /day upon providing the Utilization
Certificate and Statement of Expenditure.
• AICTE will reimburse ‘to and fro’ travel expenses to interns @ II class sleeper
rail fare. upon submission of the following documents, through post after
successful completion of internship.
a. TA form duly completed and signed
b. Original travel tickets
c. Internship completion certificate provided by Host Institute.
d. Copy of the internship allotment letter attested by the nodal officer of
the host institute.
e. Bonafide/No Objection Certificate from your college.
f. Self-attested copy of Aadhaar card.
g. Self-attested copy of 10th mark sheet.
h. Self-attested copy of 12th/Diploma mark sheet.
i. Self-attested copy of Undergraduate final year mark sheet if applicable.
j. Self-attested copy of PM-USPY allotment letter for students of
Jammu/Kashmir/Ladakh if you are not studying in respective
state/UT.
• TIME LINE:
The Schedule for process of the J&K summer Internship will be:
S. No. Activity Date
1 Portal Opens for Registration 22nd April 2025
Last Date for Candidate
2 10th May 2025
Registration & TPO verification
Last Date for Exercising Choice
3 15th May 2025
of Institutes
4 1st Round of seat allotment 19th May 2025
Last date for confirmation of
5 Willing ness to join the allotted 20th May 2025
institute
6 2nd Round of seat allotment 21st May 2025
Last date for confirmation of
7 Willing ness to join the allotted 22nd May 2025
institute
8 Internship Start from 15th June 2025
