शैक्षणिक वर् ष 2019-20 पासुन अणिल भारतीय
तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या अित्यारीत असलल्े या
संस्थेतील प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका
अणभयाणं त्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका
और्धणनमािशास्त्र, हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड कॅ टररग
टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट
व्ददतीय वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयाणं त्रकी
अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयामावलीस शासनाची
मान्यता देिेबाबत...
महाराष्ट्र शासन
उच्च व तंत्र णशक्षि णवभाग,
शासन णनिषय क्र.मान्यता-2019/(प्र.क्र.77/19)/तांणश-5
मंत्रालय णवस्तार भवन, मंबु ई-400 032.
णदनाकं : 17 मे, 2019.
वाचा :- 1) संचालक, तंत्र णशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंबु ई याचं े पत्र
क्र.10/एनजीपी/कें द्रीभतू प्रवशे प्रणक्रया/पदणवका/2019/122, णद.31/01/2019.
2) संचालक, तंत्र णशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंबु ई याचं े पत्र
क्र.10/एनजीपी/कें द्रीभतू प्रवशे प्रणक्रया/पदणवका/2019/213, णद.1/03/2019.
3) संचालक, तंत्र णशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंबु ई याचं े पत्र
क्र.10/एनजीपी/कें द्रीभतू प्रवशे प्रणक्रया/पदणवका/2019/352, णद.28/03/2019.
4) संचालक, तंत्र णशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंबु ई याचं े पत्र
क्र.10/एनजीपी/कें द्रीभतू प्रवशे प्रणक्रया/पदणवका/2019/390, णद.11/04/2019.
प्रस्तावना :-
शैक्षणिक वर्ष 2019-20 पासून अणिल भारतीय तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या अित्यारीत असलेल्या
संस्थेतील प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयाणं त्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका
और्धणनमािशास्त्र, हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड कॅ टररग टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट
व्ददतीय वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयाणं त्रकी अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीस मान्यता
शासन णनिषय क्रमांकः मान्यता-2019/(प्र.क्र.77/19)/तांणश-5
देण्याबाबतचा प्रस्ताव संचालक, तंत्रणशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंबु ई यानं ी संदभाणधन
क्रमाकं 1 ते 4 येथील पत्रान्वये शासनास सादर के ला आहे. सदर प्रस्तावाचे अनुर्ंगाने शैक्षणिक वर्ष
2019-20 पासून पदणवका अभ्यासक्रमाच्या प्रारुप प्रवशे णनयामावलीस मान्यता देण्याची बाब
शासनाच्या णवचाराधीन होती.
शासन णनिषय :-
शैक्षणिक वर्ष 2019-20 पासून राज्यातील अणिल भारतीय तंत्रणशक्षि पणरर्देच्या
अित्यारीत असलेल्या सस्ं थेतील प्रथम वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयाणं त्रकी, प्रथम वर्ष
पोस्ट एच.एस.सी. पदणवका और्धणनमािशास्त्र, हॉटेल मॅनेजमेंट ॲण्ड कॅ टररग टेक्नॉलॉजी, सरफे स
कोटींग टेक्नॉलॉजी व थेट व्ददतीय वर्ष पोस्ट एस.एस.सी. पदणवका अणभयाणं त्रकी अभ्यासक्रमाच्या
सोबत जोडण्यात आलेल्या प्रवशे णनयमावलीस शासनाची मान्यता देण्यात येत आहे.
2. या प्रवशे णनयमावलीस संचालकानं ी आवश्यक ती प्रणसद्धी द्यावी.
3. सदर शासन णनिषय महाराष्ट्र शासनाच्या www.maharashtra.gov.in या संके तस्थळावर
उपलब्ध करण्यात आला असून त्याचा संके ताकं 201905171408137708 असा आहे. हा आदेश
णडजीटल स्वाक्षरीने साक्षाणं कत करुन काढण्यात येत आहे.
महाराष्ट्राचे राज्यपाल याच्ं या आदेशानुसार व नावाने,
( अ.र. काटकर )
कायासन अणधकारी, महाराष्ट्र शासन
प्रणत,
1. संचालक, तंत्र णशक्षि संचालनालय, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, मंबु ई,
2. णनवड नस्ती.
पृष्ट्ठ 2 पैकी 2
Maharashtra State Technical Diploma Courses Educational Institutions
(Admissions) Rules, 2019
Government of Maharashtra hereby publishes Rules for eligibility and admission to First
Year and Direct Second year of various Technical Diploma courses in the State of Maharashtra.
These Rules also provides procedure about invitation of applications for admission, Eligibility
Criteria, preparation of merit list, distribution of seats, various rounds and stages of Centralised
Admission Process (CAP), admissions in Institutional Quota seats and vacant seats after CAP,
supernumerary seats, cancellation of admission, approval of list of admitted candidates, refund of
fees.
These Rules shall apply for admission to the First Year and Direct Second year of Full Time
Technical Diploma Courses in Engineering/ Technology & First Year of Diploma in Pharmacy and
Hotel Management and Catering Technology conducted by various types of Institutions from
Maharashtra State as described below-
a) All Autonomous and Non Autonomous Government Polytechnics / Institutions
b) All Government Aided Autonomous and Non Autonomous Polytechnics / Institutions including
Minority Institutions
c) All University managed Diploma Institutes/Polytechnics
d) All Un-Aided Private Polytechnics including Minority institutes
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) These Rules may be called the Maharashtra State Technical
Diploma Courses Educational Institutions (Admissions) Rules, 2019.
(2) They shall come into force with effect from Academic Year 2019-20 onwards.
2. Definitions.-In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Admission Reporting Centre” means a center where the Candidate shall report for
confirmation of admission by verification of documents and payment of Seat
acceptance fees;
(b) “Application Form” means prescribed Form filled up online by the Candidate for
admission;
(c) “appropriate authority” means the authorities declared by the State or Central
Government which approve and regulate the Diploma courses or educational
disciplines;
(d) “Autonomous Institution” means the institution to which autonomy is granted by the
Page 1 of 34
Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education and Government of Maharashtra;
(e) “BATU” means Dr.Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere;
(f) “Candidate” means the candidate who is eligible for admission to various courses as
notified by the Government, from time to time;
(g) “Centralized Admission Process (CAP)” means the centralized process of admission
carried out by the competent authority through single window system in a transparent
manner for admitting the students for various courses in Technical Diploma
educational institutions;
(h) “Competent Authority” means the Director, Technical Education, Mumbai as
appointed by the Government of Maharashtra to implement the admission process;
(i) “Course” means the full time Technical Diploma Courses in Engineering and
Technology, Pharmacy and Hotel Management and Catering Technology approved
by the All India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi and/or Pharmacy
Council of India, New Delhi as the case may be;
(j) “Department” means the Higher and Technical Education Department of Government
of Maharashtra;
(k) “Diploma” means a diploma awarded by concerned authority after successful
completion of course of study;
(l) “Director” means the Director of Technical Education, Maharashtra State;
(m) “DTE” means Directorate of Technical Education, Maharashtra State;
(n) “Facilitation Centre” means a Centre where the facilities like filling online Forms,
verification of documents, confirmation of online forms and grievances, etc. are
provided;
(o) “Fees” means the amount fixed as fee which includes tuition fee, library fee,
gymkhana fee, examination fee, development fee or amount payable for any curricular
or co-curricular activities, laboratory fee, information brochure fee and any other
amount collected from the students, by whatsoever name called, and accepted in
whichever manner, that is made payable to an Educational Institution, for whatever
purpose, by any candidate admitted to a Diploma course at such institution, but
excludes any charges payable towards use of any optional hostel accommodation,
mess charges and Students Insurance Fees;
Page 2 of 34
(p) “Foreign Student” means a student who is not a citizen of India;
(q) “Government” or “State Government” means the Government of Maharashtra;
(r) “Home District” means the revenue district area as specified in sub rule (1) of rule 5;
(s) “HSC” means the Higher Secondary School Certificate (Standard XII) examination
conducted by the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary
Education or its equivalent certificate awarded by a recognized Board;
(t) “Institution” means an Educational Institution which runs Courses imparting technical
education in Engineering and allied technical subjects leading to Diploma in
Engineering / Technology and Pharmacy;
(u) “Institutional Quota” means seats available for admission to the Eligible Candidates
at Institution level as declared by the Government or appropriate authority, from time
to time;
(v) “Inter-Se-Merit” means the order of merit declared by the Competent Authority in
respect of various classes or category of Candidates;
(w) “ITI” means the Certificate Courses offered by Industrial Training Institution;
(x) “Lateral Entry” means admission of students in second year of the course against seats
as per the guidelines of the appropriate authorities;
(y) “MSBTE” means the Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education established
under section 3 of the Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education Act, 1997
(Mah. XXXVIII of 1997);
(z) “Minority Quota” means seats earmarked for the Minority Community students from
within the State, belonging to the Minority Community to which the institution
belongs;
(aa) “Minority Educational Institution” means an Educational Institution notified as such
by the State Government, established and administered for and by the persons
belonging to the minority community, domiciled in the State of Maharashtra, having
right to do so under clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution of India;
(bb) “Non-Autonomous Institution” means those institutions which are not declared as
an ‘Autonomous Institution’ by MSBTE;
(cc) “Non-Resident Indian (NRI)” means a person who is “not ordinarily resident” under
sub-section (6) of section 6 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, and includes a person
Page 3 of 34
resident outside India under clause (w) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999, and also includes his child or ward;
(dd) “Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)” means a candidate or a person registered as an
Overseas Citizen of India as declared by the Central Government under section 7A of
the Citizenship Act 1955 and includes Persons of Indian Origin (PIO);
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, all the existing Persons of Indian Origin
(PIO) cardholders registered under notification of the Government of India, Ministry
of Home Affairs No. F. No. 26011/04/98- F. I, dated 19th August 2002 and shall now
be deemed to be Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) card holders by virtue of Notification
of Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, No. 25024/9/2014-F.I., dated 9th
January, 2015;
(ee) “OHD” means area Outside the Home District;
(ff) “Person of Indian Origin (PIO)” means a person who is a citizen of a country other
than India but who, at any time, was a citizen of India; or in whose case either parent
or any grandparent was a citizen of India by virtue of the provisions of Part II of the
Constitution of India or under the Citizenship Act, 1955;
(gg) “Qualifying Examination” means examinations on the basis of which a candidate
becomes eligible for admission or its equivalent examination;
(hh) “Sanctioned intake” means the total number of seats sanctioned or approved by the
appropriate authority for admitting candidates in a single academic year in each course
of study or discipline in an Educational Institution at the appropriate level of entry;
(ii) “SSC” means the Secondary School Certificate (Standard X) examination conducted
by the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education or its
equivalent certificate awarded by a recognized Board;
(jj) “Supernumerary Seats” means seats which are over and above the Sanctioned Intake
approved by the appropriate authority and the Government, from time to time.
(kk) “University” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2
of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
(ll) "TFWS" means the Tuition Fee Waiver Scheme of All India Council for Technical
Education.
3. Role and Responsibilities of Competent Authority –
Page 4 of 34
(1) The Competent Authority shall invite online applications in the prescribed form, from the eligible
candidates for participating in Centralized Admission Process (CAP) for seeking admission to the
Technical Diploma courses in all institutions i.e. Government, Government Aided, University
Department, BATU, and Unaided Private Technical Educational Institutions in Maharashtra.
(2) The Competent Authority shall deal with the representations received from the candidates
(excluding Private Deemed, Self Financing Universities) pertaining to allotment and admissions as
Grievance Redressal Authority.
(3) All the decisions taken in relation to Admission to First/ Direct Second Year of Diploma courses,
by the Competent Authority shall be final and binding on all concerned.
(4) The Competent Authority shall be solely responsible for smooth conduct of whole admission
process.
(5) To appoint persons / agency as service providers required for the conduct of admission process.
It shall exercise financial powers for execution of all activities related to conduct of admission
process.
(6) To prescribe application fees for admission process with prior approval of Government.
(7) To deposit funds collected through fees prescribed for admission process in the Personal Ledger
Account (PLA).
(8) To develop a proper system by using the funds collected through fees, for smooth conduct of
admission process.
(9) To prescribe remuneration to the officers and staff involved in the admission process with prior
approval of Government.
4. Eligibility Criteria,-
Sr. No. Name of Courses Eligibility conditions and requirements for admissions
(1) (2) (3)
1 Diploma in (A) First Year of Post SSC
Engineering and (1) Maharashtra State Candidature Candidate, Jammu and
Technology Kashmir Migrant Candidature Candidates.-
(i) The Candidate should be an Indian National ;
(ii) Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination or its equivalent,
with at least 35% aggregate marks
Note: Other than Maharashtra State Candidates shall be
eligible for Institution quota only.
(2) NRI / OCI / PIO, Children of Indian workers in the Gulf
countries, Foreign National.-
Page 5 of 34
(i) Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination or its equivalent,
with at least 35% aggregate marks
(ii) Any other criterion declared from time to time by
the appropriate authority as defined under the Rules.
(B) Direct Second Year of Post SSC
(1) Maharashtra State Candidature Candidate.-
(i) The Candidate should be an Indian National ;
(ii) Passed 10+2 examination with Physics and
Chemistry as compulsory subjects along with
Mathematics/ Biology subject.
OR
10+2 Science (with Mathematics as one of the
Subject)
OR
10+2 Science with Technical
OR
10+2 with Vocational.
OR
10th + (2 years ITI) with appropriate Trade
Note: Other than Maharashtra State Candidates shall be
eligible for Institution quota only.
(C) Post HSC in Surface Coating Technology
(1) Maharashtra State Candidature Candidate, Jammu and
Kashmir Migrant Candidature Candidates.-
(i) The Candidate should be an Indian National ;
(ii) Passed HSC Science with subjects English, Physics,
Chemistry and Mathematics.
Note: Other than Maharashtra State Candidates shall be
eligible for Institution quota only.
(2) NRI / OCI / PIO, Children of Indian workers in the Gulf
countries, Foreign National.-
(i) Passed HSC Science with subjects English, Physics,
Chemistry and Mathematics.
(ii) Any other criterion declared from time to time by
the appropriate authority as defined under the Rules.
2 Diploma in (1) Maharashtra State Candidature Candidate
Pharmacy (i) The Candidate should be an Indian National ;
(ii) Passed 10+2 examination with Physics and
Chemistry as compulsory subjects along with
Mathematics/ Biology subject.
Note: Other than Maharashtra State Candidates shall be
eligible for Institution quota only.
(2) NRI / OCI / PIO, Children of Indian workers in the Gulf
countries, Foreign National.-
(i) Passed 10+2 examination with Physics and
Chemistry as compulsory subjects along with
Mathematics/ Biology subject.
Page 6 of 34
(ii) Any other criterion declared from time to time by
the appropriate authority as defined under the Rules.
3 Diploma in Hotel (1) Maharashtra State Candidature Candidate, Jammu and
Management and Kashmir Migrant Candidature Candidates.-
Catering (i) The Candidate should be an Indian National ;
Technology (ii) Passed 10+2 /HSC examination or its equivalent,
with at least 35% aggregate marks
Note: Other than Maharashtra State Candidates shall be
eligible for Institution quota only.
(2) NRI / OCI / PIO, Children of Indian workers in the Gulf
countries, Foreign National.-
(i) Passed 10+2 /HSC examination or its equivalent,
with at least 35% aggregate marks
(ii) Any other criterion declared from time to time by
the appropriate authority as defined under the Rules.
5. Candidature Type,–
(1) Maharashtra State Candidature.-
Type Eligibility Criterion Home District
A (a) For First Year Post SSC Diploma Courses, - Place of passing of
Candidates passing Std. VIII, IX and SSC from a Qualifying Examination
recognized institution in Maharashtra State. falling within the jurisdiction
of the respective District area.
(b) For Post HSC Diploma Courses,-
(i) Pharmacy- Passed HSC with Physics and
Chemistry as compulsory subjects along with one
of the subject Mathematics or Biology from a
recognized institution in Maharashtra State,
(ii) Hotel Management and Catering Technology-
Passed HSC from a recognized institution in
Maharashtra State,
(iii) Surface Coating Technology- Passed HSC
Science with English, Physics, Chemistry and
Mathematics from a recognized institution in
Maharashtra State.
(c) For Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma
Courses, -Candidate Passing 12th Std. examination
with Physics and Chemistry as compulsory subjects
along with one of the Mathematics/ Biology OR
12th Science (with Mathematics as one of the
Subject) or 12th with Vocational OR 12th Science
with Technical OR
10th + (2 years ITI) with appropriate Trade from a
recognized institution in Maharashtra State.
B A Candidate who does not fall in Type A above, but Place of domicile certificate
who or whose father or mother is domiciled in the issuing authority falling
Page 7 of 34
State of Maharashtra and possesses domicile within the jurisdiction of the
certificate. respective District area.
C A Candidate who does not fall in either Type A or Place of posting of father or
Type B but whose father or mother is an employee of mother of Candidate falling
the Government of India or Government of India within the jurisdiction of the
Undertaking and who has been posted and reported respective District area
to duty in Maharashtra State before the last date for
submitting the Application Form for CAP.
D A Candidate who does not fall in any of the above Place of posting of father or
Type A, Type B and Type C but whose father or mother of Candidate or the
mother is an employee or retired employee of the place of settlement of the
Government of Maharashtra or Government of father or mother if retired or
Maharashtra Undertaking. the place of last posting if
deputed outside Maharashtra
falling within the jurisdiction
of the respective District area.
E (a) For First Year Post SSC Diploma Courses,- Candidate shall be considered
Candidate passing Std. VIII, IX and SSC from a for the Outside Home District
recognized institution located in a disputed seats or State Level Seats.
Maharashtra Karnataka Border area or from
Maharashtra, residing in the disputed Maharashtra
Karnataka Border area and also whose mother
tongue is Marathi.
(b) For Post HSC Diploma Courses,-
(i) Pharmacy- Passed HSC with Physics and
Chemistry as compulsory subjects along with one
of the subject Mathematics or Biology from a
recognized institution located in a disputed
Maharashtra Karnataka Border area or from
Maharashtra, residing in the disputed Maharashtra
Karnataka Border area and also whose mother
tongue is Marathi.,
(ii) Hotel Management and Catering Technology-
Passed HSC from a recognized institution located
in a disputed Maharashtra Karnataka Border area
or from Maharashtra, residing in the disputed
Maharashtra Karnataka Border area and also
whose mother tongue is Marathi.
(iii) Surface Coating Technology- Passed HSC
Science with English, Physics, Chemistry and
Mathematics from a recognized institution located
in a disputed Maharashtra Karnataka Border area
or from Maharashtra, residing in the disputed
Maharashtra Karnataka Border area and also
whose mother tongue is Marathi.
(c) For Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma
Courses,-Candidate Passing 12th Std. examination
with Physics and Chemistry as compulsory subjects
along with one of the Mathematics/ Biology OR
12th Science (with Mathematics as one of the
Subject) or 12th with Vocational OR 12th Science
Page 8 of 34
with Technical OR
10th + (2 years ITI) with appropriate Trade.
from a Recognized Institution located in a disputed
Maharashtra Karnataka Border area or from
Maharashtra, residing in the disputed Maharashtra
Karnataka Border area and also whose mother tongue
is Marathi.
(2) All India Candidature.- The Candidates having Indian Nationality are eligible under this
Category.
(3) Minority Candidature.-The Maharashtra domiciled Candidates belonging to a particular
linguistic or religious minority community from within the State and as notified by the Government
are eligible under this Category.
(4) NRI Candidature.- The Candidate who fulfills the conditions as defined in clause (2)(cc) of
this Rule.
(5) Foreign Student or OCI or PIO Candidature.-The Foreign Student candidates, as defined in
clause (2) (p) of this Rule, the Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) candidate as defined in clause (2)
(dd) of this rule, Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) as defined in clause (2)(ff) of this rule are eligible
under this Category.
(6) Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Candidature.-
(a) The children of citizens, who are displaced from Jammu and Kashmir to any part of India or
from unsafe border area of Jammu and Kashmir to a relatively safer place in Jammu and
Kashmir from 1990 onwards due to terrorist activities; or
(b) The children of officers belonging to Indian Administrative Services (IAS) or Indian Police
Services (IPS) or Indian Foreign Services (IFS) and children of staff belonging to military
and paramilitary forces transferred to Jammu and Kashmir to combat terrorist activities and
joined the post on or before the last date for submission of application for admission; or
(c) The children of staff and officers of Jammu and Kashmir police engaged in combating
terrorism;
are eligible under this category.
6. Sanctioned Intake, Reservations and Supernumerary Seats for various Courses.- (1) The
Sanctioned Intake for First Year Diploma Course and Direct Second Year (Lateral entry) of Diploma
Courses shall be as per the approval given by the appropriate authority which is competent for giving
approval to respective Courses and affiliation given by the MSBTE. For admission to Direct Second
Year (Lateral Entry) of Diploma Courses, number of seats available shall be calculated as given in
Schedule -III.
Page 9 of 34
(2) The provision of various reservations for the seats available & documents required under
Admission Process are mentioned in Schedule IV.
(3) The supernumerary seats shall be available to the educational institutions as approved by the
appropriate authority, from time to time.
7. Allocation of Seats.-The percentage of allocation of seats for Maharashtra State candidates in the
Home District, Other than Home District and State Level shall be in accordance with the policy of
the Government as specified in Schedule-I for First Year post SSC Diploma Courses, Schedule-II
for First Year post HSC Diploma Courses and Schedule –III for Direct Second Year of Post SSC
Diploma Courses:
(1) Maharashtra State Candidature Seats.- The Candidates having Maharashtra State
Candidature as specified in rule 5(1) of these Rules, shall be eligible for these seats;
(2) Minority Quota Seats.-The Candidates having Candidature mentioned in rule 5(3) of these
Rules shall be eligible for these seats as specified in Schedule-I, Schedule-II and Schedule-
III. In an Unaided Minority institutes these seats shall be filled as per the policy of the State
Government and not less than fifty-one per cent (fifty per cent in case of Government Aided
minority institute) of the sanctioned intake shall be filled by minority students from within
the State, belonging to the minority community to which the institution belongs on the basis
of inter-se merit through Centralized Admission Process (CAP).
(3) Institutional Quota Seats.- The Institution can admit Eligible Candidates as specified in
Schedule-I, Schedule-II and Schedule III, subject to following conditions,-
(i) The Candidates having Candidature mentioned in rule 5(1), 5(2), 5(3), 5(4) and 5(6) of
these Rules shall be eligible for these seats;
(ii) The maximum 5% seats may be filled in from the NRI Candidates, if it is approved by
the appropriate authority, at the Institution level;
(iii) If the seats reserved for this NRI quota remain vacant, those vacant seats may be filled
in by the Institution, from the Eligible Candidates of All India Candidature seats:
Provided that while filling of these vacant seats the preference shall be given to the
Maharashtra State Candidature Candidates on the basis of Inter-Se-Merit.
(4) Supernumerary seats for.-
(a) OCI/PIO, Foreign Students and the children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries.-(i)
The Candidates having candidature as given in rule 5(5) of these Rules and the children of
Indian Workers in Gulf Countries shall be eligible for these supernumerary seats;
Page 10 of 34
(ii)These seats shall be subject to the maximum of 15% of the Sanctioned Intake seats.
Out of 15% seats, one third seats shall be reserved for the children of Indian Workers in
Gulf Countries and two third seats shall be reserved for OCI / PIO or Foreign Student
Candidates, or as prescribed by the appropriate authority, from time to time;
(iii) These seats shall be filled in by the institution on the basis of Inter-Se-Merit of
candidates as given in rule 8 of these Rules.
(b) Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Candidature,- (i) The Candidates having Candidature as
given in rule 5(6) of these Rules shall be eligible for these seats;
(ii) The number of seats for this quota shall be as per the policy of the Government;
(iii) These seats shall be filled in by the Competent Authority.
(5) Invitation of Application form-
(1) The Candidates seeking admissions to the courses for the seats provided in -
(a) rule 7 (1), 7(2) and 7 (4) (b) of these Rules shall apply to the CompetentAuthority
for admission through Centralized Admission Process (CAP),
(b) rule 7 (3) and 7 (4) (a) of these Rules shall initially apply to the Competent Authority
for verification of documents and then to respective institute. The institutions shall give
admission to such eligible applicants on the basis of Inter-Se-Merit prepared by
respective institute, as specified in rule 13.
(2) The Candidate should submit, along-with the application, the requisite certificates, as
applicable in the necessary Proforma issued by the concerned competent authority.
8. Preparation of Merit List.-
(1) Assignment of Merit Number.- All the eligible Candidates who have submitted Application Form
on or before the last date specified for the submission of Application Form for Admission through
CAP shall be assigned a merit number. The merit list shall be prepared on the basis of marks obtained
at qualifying examination, or any other criterion as specified in sub-section (3) of this rule.
(2) Change of Marks due to verification.- If the marks in the qualifying examination are modified
due to verification and the same is duly certified by the concerned Appropriate Authority or Board,
the same shall be reported to the Competent Authority for admission through CAP or its designated
representatives prior to 5 P.M. on the day of display of final merit list.
(3) Assignment of Merit Number for various Courses.-(a) For Admission to First Year of Post SSC
Diploma Courses in Engineering and Technology.-The merit list of the Eligible Candidates shall
be prepared on the basis of percentage of aggregate marks obtained at SSC ( including additional
marks, if mentioned in mark sheet) ) or as per any other criterion as may be specified from time to
time:
Page 11 of 34
Provided that, in case of tie, the relative merit of Candidates shall be resolved in the
following order of preference and the methodology as specified below,-
(a) higher percentage of marks in the subject Mathematics at SSC;
(b) higher percentage of marks in the subject Science at SSC;
(c) higher percentage of marks in the subject English at SSC;
(d) Passing HSC Science ;
(e) Passing HSC with Minimum Competency Vocational Course ;
(f) Passing ITI Trade of 2 Years duration;
(g) Passing Intermediate Grade Drawing examination.
(b) For Admission to Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses in Engineering and
Technology.-The separate merit lists for each of qualifying Examination of the Eligible
Candidates shall be prepared on the basis of percentage of marks obtained at the qualifying
examination:
Provided that, in case of tie, the relative merit of Candidates shall be resolved in the
following order of preference and the methodology as specified below,-
(a) Higher percentage of marks in Mathematics at SSC;
(b) Higher percentage of marks in Science at SSC;
(c) Higher percentage of marks in English at SSC.
(c) For Admission to Post HSC Diploma Course in Surface Coating Technology.- The merit list
shall be prepared on the basis of percentage of marks obtained in the subjects Physics, Chemistry
and Mathematics taken together at HSC:
Provided that, in case of tie, the relative merit of Candidates shall be resolved in the
following order of preference and the methodology as specified below,-
(a) higher percentage of aggregate marks in HSC ;
(b) higher percentage of marks in Mathematics at HSC;
(c) higher percentage of aggregate marks in SSC;
(d) higher percentage of marks in Mathematics at SSC;
(e) Passing Intermediate Grade drawing examination.
(d) For Admission to First Year Pharmacy,- The merit list shall be prepared on the basis of
percentage of marks obtained in the subjects Physics, Chemistry and higher marks of Mathematics
or Biology in HSC:
Provided that, in case of tie, the relative merit of Candidates shall be resolved in the following
order of preference and the methodology as specified below,-
(a) higher percentage of aggregate marks in HSC;
Page 12 of 34
(b) higher percentage of marks in Physics at HSC;
(c) higher percentage of marks in Chemistry at HSC;
(d) higher percentage of marks in English at HSC;
(e) higher percentage of marks in SSC.
(e) First Year Hotel Management and Catering Technology.- The merit list shall be prepared on the
basis of Percentage of marks obtained at HSC:
Provided that, in case of tie, the relative merit of Candidates shall be resolved in the following
order of preference and the methodology as specified below,-
(a) Passing HSC Science;
(b) Passing HSC Home Science;
(c) Passing HSC with Minimum Competency Vocational Course;
(d) Passing HSC Commerce;
(e) Passing HSC Arts.
9. Centralised Admission Process (CAP).– (1)The Technical Diploma Educational Institution shall
admit Candidates through the Centralised Admission Process. The stages of CAP shall be as stated
below,-
(a) Display or publishing of Information Brochure by the Competent Authority;
(b) Filling Online Application Form by Candidate for participation in the Centralised
Admission Process;
(c) Uploading of scanned images of valid necessary original documents as per the
requirement of the admission while filling of online application form;
(d) Document Verification at Facilitation Centre by the Candidate. It is mandatory on the
candidate’s part to produce all original documents in support of the claim made in the
application form;
(e) Display or publishing of provisional merit lists, submission of grievances (if any), and
display or publishing of final merit lists;
(f) Display of Category wise Seats (Seat Matrix) available for CAP Rounds;
(g) Filling up and Confirmation of Online Option Form having preferences of Courses and
Institutions prior to respective CAP Rounds. Candidates may fill in preferences of
Institutes and Courses in decreasing order of their preference as specified by
Competent Authority. The option form once confirmed shall be considered for
allotment in the respective CAP Rounds;
Page 13 of 34
(h) Display of Provisional Allotment of respective CAP Rounds indicating allotted
institute and Course;
(i) Reporting and accepting the offered seat at Admission Reporting Centre by the
Candidate as per the schedule declared by the Competent Authority;
(j) Only after reporting to ARC as per clause (i), the candidate should report to the allotted
institute for seeking admission on the allotted seat as per final allotment in CAP rounds;
(k) The time schedule prescribed by the competent authority for compliances for various
stages of CAP is mandatory.
(2) Conduct of CAP Round-I.- The seats available for Round I shall be published on the Website.
The Candidate whose names appeared in the final merit list of CAP shall be eligible to
participate in this round by filling online option form. The candidate shall fill and confirm the
option form through candidate’s Login.
(3) During the CAP: (a) If a candidate is allotted the seat as per his first preference, such allotment
shall be auto freezed and the candidate shall accept the allotment so made. Such candidate shall
then be not eligible for participation in the subsequent CAP rounds. Such candidates shall then
report to ARC for verification of documents and payment of seat acceptance fee. Thereafter
such candidates shall report to the allotted institute and seek admission on the allotted seat. If
such candidate does not report to ARC for confirmation of seat acceptance, their claim on the
allotted seat shall stand forfeited automatically and the seat shall become available for fresh
allotment. For such candidate, the allotment so made shall be the final allotment;
(b) Candidate who have been allotted seat other than the first preference given by the candidate and
if the candidate is satisfied with such allotment and do not wish to participate in further CAP
rounds, such candidate can freeze the offered seat through candidate’s login. Once the candidate
freezes the allotted seat, such candidate shall then report to ARC for verification of documents
and payment of seat acceptance fee. Thereafter such candidates shall report to the allotted
institute and seek admission on the allotted seat. If such candidate does not report to ARC for
confirmation of seat acceptance, their claim on the allotted seat shall stand forfeited
automatically and the seat shall become available for fresh allotment. For such candidate, the
allotment so made shall be the final allotment. Such candidate shall then be not eligible for
participation in the subsequent CAP rounds;
(c) Candidate who have been allotted seat other than first preference and accepted the seat by
reporting to ARC for confirmation of seat acceptance shall be eligible for participation in the
subsequent rounds for betterment;
Page 14 of 34
(d) Candidate who have been allotted seat other than first preference and not accepted the seat by
not reporting to ARC for confirmation of seat acceptance shall be eligible for participation in
the subsequent rounds;
(4) Conduct of CAP Round-II and III.- (a) The seats available for Rounds II and III shall be
published on the website. The Candidates eligible for respective rounds II & III are allowed to fill
in and/or edit online option form filled in by the candidate for the previous round. The seats to be
allotted during these rounds shall be available to the eligible candidates falling under the following
categories. –
(i) Candidates as per the Rule 3(c) and 3(d) above;
(ii) Candidates who have not been allotted any seat in any of the previous rounds;
(iii) Candidates who did not participate (failure of filling option form) in previous rounds.
(b) Candidates who have been allotted seat other than first preference and reported to ARC for
confirmation of seat acceptance, whilst filling fresh option form, he/she need not fill the preference
already allotted to the candidate in the previous round. Once upward preference is allotted to such
candidate, his earlier seat allotment shall stand automatically cancelled. In the event of no such
upward preference is allotted, his previous allotment stands retained;
(c) There shall be no further betterment option available to the candidate after round III. The
allotment made and/or allotment retained in round III for participating candidates in round III shall
be final;
(d) At the time of reporting to ARC for confirming the allotted seat, the candidate shall produce all
the original documents in support of the claims made in the application. In the event the candidate
fails to produce the documents in support of the claim, so made in the application, the allotment
shall stand cancelled automatically and the seat shall become available for allotment in further
rounds;
(e) The candidate will be entitled to rectify the following errors in the application form at the time
of scrutiny of documents at ARC viz.
(i) change of gender from male to female and vice-versa;
(ii) error while entering marks obtained by candidate in examination, However the change in the
merit number due to increase in the marks will not be permitted;
(iii) error while mentioning the caste/sub-caste/the category of backward class but in no case a
candidate will be allowed to change from General to Reserved Category. A reserved category
candidate will be allowed to change his category from Reserved to General upon his failure to submit
requisite documents like Caste/Tribe Certificate, Validity Certificate, Non-Creamy Layer Certificate
etc. as the case may be.
Page 15 of 34
(iv) Removal of minority status due to failure of submission of supporting documents;
(v) Removal of Disability status due to failure of submission of supporting documents;
(vi) Removal of Defence status due to failure of submission of supporting documents
(vii) Change in Type of Candidature;
(viii) Change in Home District;
(ix) Removal of Tuition Fee Waiver Seats (TFWS) status due to failure of submission of supporting
documents;
(x) Removal of Technical/Vocational Status due to failure of submission of supporting documents;
(xi) Change in Qualification.
Apart from the above no other change or rectification shall be allowed.
(f) In case of additional round, if any, the category of candidates mentioned in clause (a) above shall
be entitled to participate and will be entitled to fill in fresh option Form. In such case, the candidate
need not fill in the previously allotted preference in their preference list. Once the upward allotment
is made, the earlier allotment shall stand automatically cancelled. In the event no such upward
preference is allotted in this round, the candidate’s previous allotment stands retained.
(5) The Candidate shall report to the institution finally allotted to him and confirm his admission in
institution as per the schedule. The Institute shall verify the required documents and upload the
admission of the candidates in the online system through Institute Login immediately and shall issue
a system generated receipt of confirmation of admission & fee paid receipt to the candidate.
10. CAP allotment stages and process of allotment.- Allotment of seats under CAP shall be made in
the following manner,-
(1) Maharashtra State Candidature Candidate.- (a)The stages of computerised allotment are as
follows,-
Stage –I: For all the Candidates.-
(a) All the Candidates (Technical, Non-Technical, Open, Reserved, Male, Female) belonging to
various categories shall be considered for allotment of seats as per their Inter-Se-Merit.
(b) Economically Weaker Section (EWS) and Orphan Candidates shall be considered for
allotment of seats reserved for them as per their Inter-Se-Merit, and if seat is not available in
their reserved category, then they shall be considered for allotment in Open Category as per
Inter-Se-Merit.
Page 16 of 34
(c) Backward Class Category Candidates shall be considered for allotment in Open Category
seat by virtue of their Inter-Se-Merit and if seat is not available in Open Category then they shall
be considered for allotment in their respective reserved category.
(d) SBC Category Candidates shall be considered for allotment in Open Category by virtue of
their merit and in case of SBC Candidates who were in Backward Class prior to their inclusion in
SBC Category shall be considered in their original Backward Class Category.
(e) Persons with Disability Category Candidates shall be considered for allotment of the seat
reserved for them in their respective category, as per their Inter-Se-Merit and if seat in their
respective reserve Category is not available, then he shall be considered for allotment in Open
Category as per their Inter-Se- Merit.
(f) Defence Category Candidates shall be considered for allotment of the seats reserved for them
in their respective Category as per their Inter-Se-Merit and if seat in their respective reserve
Category is not available then he shall be considered for allotment in Open Category as per their
Inter-Se-Merit.
(g) For the Candidates with Technical or Vocational subjects in qualifying examination, the seat
availability shall be checked in the following order,-
(i) Seats for Technical Candidates in Open Category;
(ii) Seats for Technical Candidates in respective reserved Category;
(iii) Seats for general Candidates (for both Technical and Non-technical) in Open Category;
(iv) Seats for general Candidates (for both Technical and Non-Technical) in the respective
reserved Category.
(h) If a seat is available for a candidate in more than one category, then the seat allotment shall
be done in the sequence as given below,-
1. Seat for Ladies,
2. Seat for person with disability candidates,
3. Seat for Defence.
Stage – II: For allotment of seats reserved for Female to Male Candidates.-If the seat remains
vacant after allotment to Female Candidates of the Backward Class Category or Open Category,
such seats shall be allotted to the Male Candidates belonging to respective Backward Class or
Open Category.
Stage –III: For SBC Category Candidates. -If the Other Backward Class Category seats remain
vacant, such seats shall be considered for allotment to the Candidates of SBC Category, limited
to the extent of 2% seats.
Page 17 of 34
Stage –IV: For all Candidates (without any type of Reservation).-The seats shall be considered
for allotment to all the Candidates based on Inter-Se-Merit.
Stage –V: For all Candidates (without any Candidature Type)- (a) The seats remaining vacant
shall be allotted to the all Eligible Candidates.
(b) For seats reserved for Female Candidate, the procedure for reservation as given in Government
Circular of General Administration Department No. RSV 1012/CN-16/12/16A Dated 13th
August 2014 shall be adopted.
(2) Minority Quota Seats.-The stages of computerised allotment are as follows,-
Stage –I: The seats under minority quota in the minority institution linguistic or religious shall
be allotted to the respective minority candidates.
Stage – II: If the seats remain vacant, they shall be allotted to the Maharashtra State candidature
Candidates.
(3) For Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Candidature Candidates: The Supernumerary seats for
Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Candidature candidates shall be allotted to the Eligible Candidates as
in 5(6) on the basis of Inter-Se-Merit.
11. Allotment of seats by CAP Rounds I, II and III.-
(1) CAP Round I, II, and III shall be conducted by computerized allotment.
(2) In CAP Round I.-
(a) for Minority Institutions, the allotment shall be given to the candidates as per following
preference,-
(i) Stage I of sub-rule (2) of rule 10,
(ii) Stages I to II of sub-rule (1) of rule 10;
(b) for other than Minority Institutions, the allotment shall be given to the candidates as per
Stages I to II of sub-rule (1) of rule 10 of these Rules.
(3) In CAP Round II.-
(a) for Minority Institutions, the allotment shall be given to the candidates as per following
preference, -
(i) Stage I of sub-rule (2) of rule 10,
(ii) Stages I to IV of sub-rule (1) of rule 10,
(iii) Stage II of sub-rule (2) of rule 10;
(b) for other than Minority Institutions, the allotment shall be given to the candidates as per
Stages I to IV of sub-rule (1) of rule 10 of these Rules.
Page 18 of 34
(4) In CAP Round III.-
(a) for Minority Institutions, the allotment shall be given to the candidates as per following
preference, -
(i) Stage I of sub-rule (2) of rule 10,
(ii) Stages I to V of sub-rule (1) of rule 10,
(iii) Stage II of sub-rule (2) of rule 10;
(b) for other than Minority Institutions, the allotment shall be given to the candidates as per
Stages I to V of sub-rule (1) of rule 10 of these Rules.
(5) If the seat remains vacant due to non-allotment and non-reporting, such seat will be considered
for allotment in subsequent round.
(6) Every stage in CAP Round I, II and III shall be executed with HD and OHD tag and if the seats
remain vacant then the same stage shall be executed without HD and OHD tag. If further seats
remain vacant for any reason in rule 7(1) and 7(2) of these Rules they shall be considered for
allotment to all the candidates as per rule 5(1) irrespective of the seat type on the basis of Inter-Se-
Merit.
12. General provisions.-
(a) Allotment in CAP Rounds I, II and III of Home District Seats, Other than Home District
seats and State Level seats will be carried out as per Inter-Se-Merit of Candidates having
Maharashtra State Candidature. The seats will be allotted to Candidates as per Inter-Se-Merit,
options filled and seats available at that point of time in the stage of CAP Rounds I, II and III.
(b) All Candidates eligible for a particular stage of allotment will be considered for
allotment of a seat in that stage, even if they have been allotted or not allotted a seat in the
previous stage.
(c) During the allotment of any stage, the Candidate may get upward shift in the allotment
with reference to the options filled by the Candidate according to availability of seats at that
point of time.
(d) There shall not be any reservation under different categories in Technical Diploma
Educational Institution, for allocation of seats stated in rule 7(2), 7(3) and 7(4) of these Rules;
(e) All reserved Category Candidates (including SBC in their original Category) shall be
considered for allotment in all stages.
(f) Due to upward shifts, the seats falling vacant shall be considered for allotment in further
iterations of the same stage as per the provisions of that stage of allotment.
(g) Allotment against the first available option in the order of preference filled in shall be
retained as final allotment.
Page 19 of 34
(h) The allotment list displayed on website will show the provisional allotment offered to
the Candidates. No personal communication or allotment letters in this regard shall be issued to
the Candidates.
(i) A Candidate who has been allotted a seat shall download the “Provisional Seat
Allotment Letter”. At the time of seat acceptance Candidate has to pay seat acceptance fees
through online mode or by a demand draft in favour of Competent Authority at an Admission
Reporting Centre. Seat will be confirmed by the Admission Reporting Centre after verification
of the original documents and ensuring that the Candidate meets all the eligibility norms. The
centre in-charge shall issue the Online Receipt of acceptance.
(j) The seat acceptance fee shall be Rs. 1000/-, for all admitted candidates the same shall
be treated as non- refundable.
(k) Failure to report in person for seat acceptance will be considered as if the Candidate has
rejected the offer.
(l) Allotted Seat will be cancelled if, at any time, any of the document or certificate is
found to be invalid or fraudulent and/or the Candidate does not meet the eligibility norms.
(m) Candidates who want to reject the allocated seat can do so by not remitting the seat
acceptance fee at the Admission Reporting Centre. Candidates who reject allocated seat shall be
considered for admission in subsequent rounds only if they submit fresh option form for
subsequent round of admission as per schedule.
(n) If any of the statement made in application form or any information supplied by the
candidate in connection with his admission is found to be false or incorrect, the Principal shall
cancel his admission and forfeit the fees. An appeal against the action of cancellation of
admission, may be preferred within seven days to the Competent Authority. The Competent
Authority shall decide the appeal within fifteen days and his decision thereon shall be final.
(o) Complaints regarding the use of fake Certificates to be investigated in time bound
manner and if found guilty, such admission shall be cancelled. Further, appropriate action shall
be initiated with due intimation to Competent Authority.
13. Admissions in Institutional Quota and vacant seats after CAP.-The Director or Principal of the
institution shall carry out the admissions for these seats in the following manner.-
(a) Admissions shall be made in a transparent manner and strictly as per the Inter-Se-
Merit of the Candidates who have applied to Competent Authority and then to the institution.
Page 20 of 34
(b) Information brochure or prospectus of the Institution which specifies Rules of
admission should be published well before the commencement of the process of admission.
All the information in the brochures should also be displayed on the Institution’s website.
(c) Institution shall invite applications by notifying schedule of admission and the
number of seats in each course to be filled by the institution, by advertisement in on the website
of the institution.
(d) Aspiring Candidates fulfilling the eligibility criteria as notified by the Government
and specified by the appropriate authority, from time to time, shall apply to the Principal or
Director of the respective institution for admission at the Institution level as provided in rule
7(5) (b) and shall be filled on the basis of Inter-Se-Merit prepared by following the procedure
specified in rule 8 (3) of these Rules.
(e) The institution, after verification of all required documents, shall display the Inter-
Se-Merit lists of the Candidates to be filled in at the institution level, in the Institutional Quota
and Supernumerary Quota of OCI / PIO, Foreign National, Children’s of Indian workers in
Gulf Countries along with the vacant seats after CAP, on the notice board and shall publish the
same on the website of the institution.
(f) The Minority or Non-Minority institution intending to surrender the Institutional
Quota (in part or full) of specified courses to the CAP shall communicate two days before the
display of seat matrix of CAP Round I and the same shall be allotted as per the Rules of CAP.
The Institutes shall not be allowed to surrender Institutional quota seats thereafter.
(g) All the admissions and cancellations shall be updated immediately through online
system.
(h) If any CAP seat remains or becomes vacant after the CAP Rounds then the same shall
be filled in by the Candidate from the same Category for which it was earmarked during the
CAP. Further if the seats remain vacant then the seats shall be filled on the basis of Inter-Se-
Merit of the applicants.
14. Approval of Merit List and the Admitted Candidates List.- (1) After completion of Admission
process every Institution shall submit the Admission- approval proposal to the Competent Authority.
(2) The Admission-approval proposal shall include the list of all Candidates admitted which
shall have the quota, Candidature Type, Reservation, Qualification Marks, etc., as well as, the
required documents of the Candidates admitted at institution level.
(3) If unaided minority institution fails to admit minimum fifty-one percent of its Sanctioned
Intake from the persons belonging to the concerned minority, for a period of three consecutive years
Page 21 of 34
the Competent Authority shall inform the Department accordingly. The Department shall forward
such cases along with observations to the Minorities Development Department as per provisions of
section 12C of the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act 2004.
15. Cancellation of Admission and Refund of fees, return of documents by Institutions. -
(a) The Candidate shall apply online for cancellation and submit duly signed copy of system
generated application for cancellation of admission to the institution. Once the candidate
submits online request for cancellation, his/her admission shall be treated as cancelled. The
Institute shall consider the online request made by Candidate for cancellation as final
irrespective of whether he/she has submitted duly signed copy of system generated
application to the Institute. Upon such cancellation, the candidate shall lose the claim on the
seat and such seat shall become available for further allotment. The candidate shall then
become entitled to and the Institute shall refund the entire fees to the candidate after
deduction of Rs.1000/- towards processing charges and return all his/her original documents
submitted to the Institute within three days from submission of duly signed copy of system
generated application to the Institute;
(b) Notwithstanding clause (a) above, candidate shall not be entitled to any refund of his/her
fee except the Security Deposit and Caution Money Deposit if the online cancellation is
effected by the candidate after 5.00 P.M of the cut-off date prescribed by the Competent
Authority;
(c) No institution, who has in its possession or custody, of any document in the form of
certificates or any other documents deposited with it by a person for the purpose of seeking
admission in such institution, shall refuse to return such certificates or other document with
a view to induce or compel such person to pay any fee or fees in respect of any course or
program of study which such person does not intend to pursue or avail any facility in such
institution. In such cases action shall be taken as per the directives given by the Government
from time to time.
(d) The institution shall not recover the fees for the subsequent years from the student seeking
cancellation of his admission at any point of time.
16. Change of Course or Institution after First, Second Year.-
(1) The Candidate seeking for a change in course or shift after successfully completing the
First Year of studies or both first and second semester examination in full or failed in one of the
heads of passing will be allowed to do so in the same institution subject to the availability of seats
Page 22 of 34
and changes will be carried out based on the marks of First Year or First and Second Semester
together. The Principal shall be responsible for ascertaining the eligibility of the Candidates as laid
down by the MSBTE for the course to which the Candidate is being transferred.
(2) Transfer of Candidates Course and / or Institution after first or second year shall be made
in the following manner,-
(a) The Candidate once admitted in first year or second year shall not be eligible for transfer
to any other institution during the same academic year;
(b) The Candidate passing the first year (both first and second semester) or second year
(both third and fourth semester) examinations in full or failed in one of the heads of
passing are considered as eligible for transfer of institution or course, provided that for
transfer after second year the candidate should have passed the first year;
(c) There shall be no transfer of students at any stage from Autonomous Institutions to
Autonomous Institutions, Autonomous Institutions to any other Institutions and any other
institutions to Autonomous Institutions;
(d) There shall be no transfer of students at any stage in any case from Unaided Institutions
to Government or Government Aided, University Departments, University Managed
Institutions. However, the Candidate from Government or Government Aided, university
Departments, University Managed institution may seek transfer to Unaided Educational
Institution;
(e) Transfer to Unaided Institutions.- The Principal of Unaided institution shall consider the
Candidates from other institutions for transfer with prior approval from the Directorate
of Technical Education on submission of No Objection Certificate (NOC) from
institution, Eligibility Certificate from the MSBTE and vacancy position. The Principal
or Director shall ascertain the eligibility of Candidates as laid down by the MSBTE for
the course to which the Candidate is being transferred;
(f) No Application without recommendation of the Principal of Institution shall be
entertained by the Directorate of Technical Education;
(g) If the result of the MSBTE or Institution is not declared before the process of transfer,
Candidates of that Board or Institution will lose claim on transfer.
(3) The candidate not fulfilling the eligibility criteria for transfer shall not be transferred to any
institute in any circumstances.
(4)The Candidates admitted under Supernumerary Quota seats are not eligible for change of Course
or Institution.
Page 23 of 34
(5) The candidates from the educational institutions which are outside the purview of this Rules shall
be eligible for transfer to the unaided private educational institutions subject to the fulfilment of
eligibility criterion and requirements as may be notified by the Government from time to time and
the fulfilment of the conditions stated above in sub rule (2).
(6) In case of progressive closure of the Course or Institution, it is mandatory for the Institution to
continue the course till the completion of the course duration. In such case of progressive closure,
no candidate shall be eligible for transfer and the provisions in sub –rule (1) and (2) of this rule shall
not be applicable.
Provided that, the Candidates becoming eligible for admission after the course or institute is closed
shall be eligible for transfer of course or Institution, if he is otherwise fulfil the eligibility for
admission as specified by the concerned Board/University or Institution to which the candidate seeks
admission.
(7) List of all transfers shall be communicated to the Competent Authority for final approval;
Page 24 of 34
Schedule –I
(see rule 6 & 7)
(For First Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses)
A (1). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Government and
Aided Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.
Sr. Type of Institution CAP Seats as % of Sanctioned Intake
No excluding NRI Quota
Home Other than Home Minority
District seats District seats Seats
1 All Government and
Government Aided Institutions
including Autonomous
Institutions but excluding 70%#* 30%#* Nil
Minority Educational
Institutions
2 Government and Aided
Minority Institutions including
35% 15% 50%
Autonomous Institutions
3 Government Institutions with
Second shift Courses for
21% 9% 70%
Religious Minority Students ¥
These seats are available for Maharashtra State Candidature Candidates only.
# - Excluding One seat for D. D. Daruwala Memorial Scholarship Trust is available in
Walchand College of Engineering, Sangli (Diploma Wing). The seat can be allotted to
any of the course available in the institution.
¥ - Refer GR TED-2010/(334/2010)/TE-5 Dated 13th September 2011
* 10% seats of the sanctioned intake capacity of the Textile course at Government
Polytechnic, Solapur shall be reserved for the weaver communities of Solapur district.
Note : 15% of seats with Competent Authority are reserved for candidates passing SSC
examination with Technical/Vocational subjects as prescribed by the Directorate of
Vocational Education, Maharashtra State.
In case of unique courses, seat shall be allotted at State Level.
A (2). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Unaided Private
Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.
No. of Seats- as % of Sanctioned Intake
Sr. Type of Institution CAP Seats Institution Quota
No Maharashtra State (M.S.) Minority (including 5% Quota
Candidates. Quota for NRI, if applicable)
Unaided Private Home District
Educational Technical 8.4%
Institutions Non-Technical 47.6%
1 Nil 20%
(excluding
minority Other than Home District
Institutions) Technical 3.6%
Page 25 of 34
Non-Technical 20.4%
Unaided Minority Home District* ( 70% of
Educational M.S. Seats$)
Institutions Technical 10.5 % of
M.S. Seats$ Minimum
Non-Technical 59.5% of 51%@
M.S. Seats$
2 20%
Other than Home District*
(30% of M.S. Seats$)
Technical 4.5% of M.
S. Seats$
Non-Technical 25.5% of M.
S. Seats$
CAP Seats = Sanctioned Intake – Institutional Quota
$ M.S. Seats = CAP Seats - Minority Quota
%- Percentage
* The seats excluding the Minority Quota and the Institutional Quota shall be filled in the
stipulated percentage from the Maharashtra Candidature Candidate and All India Candidature
Candidate.
@These are the minimum percentage of seats to be filled in the Minority Institution through CAP,
this may be extended up to 100%. However before commencement of the CAP, such Institution
shall declare and inform to the Competent Authority, the maximum percentage of minority quota
to be filled in their institution.
A(3) . Allocation of Supernumerary Seats, -
(1) Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Candidates to be filled by Competent
Authority- The number of seats for this quota shall be as per the policy of the
Government.
(2) OCI/PIO, Foreign Students and the children of Indian Workers in Gulf
Countries candidates to be filled by Institution - 15% of the Sanctioned Intake seats or
as prescribed by the appropriate authority, from time to time.
(3) Government of India Nominees candidates from states and Union
Territories which lack the facility in Technical Education to be filled by Competent
Authority-The number of seats shall be decided by Ministry of Human Resource
Development (MHRD), Government of India.
(4) Seats granted by the All India Council for Technical Education, for the
Institutions falling under the Centrally Supported Scheme of “Upgrading existing
Polytechnics to integrate Persons with Disability (PwD)”. These seats shall be filled by
the respective institute.
(5) Seats for Marathi speaking candidates of Mauritius (MR) to be filled by
Competent Authority - five seats are available in the state for the sons and the daughters
Page 26 of 34
of the Marathi speaking persons from Mauritius. These seats will be allotted to any of
the Polytechnics in the state.
(6) Seats for National Cadet Corps (N.C.C.) Candidates to be filled by
Competent Authority - fifteen seats are available in the state as per the policy of the
Government.
(7) Tuition Fee Waiver Seats (TFWS) - 5% of the Sanctioned Intake seats or as
prescribed by the appropriate authority, from time to time. These seats shall be filled
through centralized admission process conducted by Competent Authority.
Page 27 of 34
Schedule –II
(see rule 6 & 7)
(For First Year of Post HSC Diploma Courses)
B (1). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Government and
Aided Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.
Sr. Type of Institution CAP Seats as % of Sanctioned Intake
No excluding NRI Quota
General Seats Minority seats
1 All Government & Government Aided
Institutions including Autonomous
Institutions but excluding Minority 100% Nil
Educational Institutions
2 Government. Aided Minority
50% 50%
Institutions including Autonomous
Institutions
These seats are available for Maharashtra State Candidature Candidates only
B (2). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Unaided Private
Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.
No. of Seats in as % of Sanctioned Intake
CAP Seats Institutional
Sr. Quota(including
Type of Institution
No. 5% Quota for
Maharashtra Minority
NRI, if
State (M.S.) Quota
applicable)
Candidates
1 Unaided Private Educational
Institutions (excluding minority 80 % Nil 20%
Institutions)
2 Unaided Minority Educational 100% of M.S. Minimum
20%
Institutions Seats*$ 51%@
CAP Seats = Sanctioned Intake – Institutional Quota
$ M.S. Seats = CAP Seats - Minority Quota
%- Percentage
* The seats excluding the Minority Quota and the Institutional Quota shall be filled in the
stipulated percentage from the Maharashtra Candidature Candidate and All India Candidature
Candidate.
@These are the minimum percentage of seats to be filled in the Minority Institution through
CAP, this may be extended up to 100%. However, before commencement of the CAP, such
Institution shall declare and inform to the Competent Authority, the maximum percentage of
minority quota to be filled in their institution.
B (3). Allocation of Supernumerary Seats, -
Page 28 of 34
(1) Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Candidates to be filled by Competent Authority-
The number of seats for this quota shall be as per the policy of the Government.
(2) OCI/PIO Foreign Students and the children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
candidates to be filled by Institution - 15% of the Sanctioned Intake seats or as
prescribed by the appropriate authority, from time to time.
(3) Government of India Nominees candidates from states and Union Territories which
lack the facility in Technical Education to be filled by Competent Authority-The
number of seats shall be decided by Ministry of Human Resource Development
(MHRD), Government of India.
(4) Tuition Fee Waiver Seats (TFWS) - 5% of the Sanctioned Intake seats or as
prescribed by the appropriate authority, from time to time. These seats shall be filled
through centralized admission process conducted by Competent Authority.
(5) Seats granted by the All India Council for Technical Education, for the Institutions
falling under the Centrally Supported Scheme of “Upgrading existing Polytechnics
to integrate Persons with Disability (PwD)”. These seats shall be filled by the
respective institute.
Page 29 of 34
Schedule III
(see rule 6 & 7)
(For Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses)
The distribution of seats available shall be notified on the website before submission of
option Form of Centralised Admission Process.
(i) Lateral Entry Seats: As per the norms of appropriate authority;
(ii) Vacant Seats: The seats, within the sanctioned intake, which remain vacant during
previous year shall also be filled in during lateral entry admission process after due
consideration of the changes of course or institution by the candidates in terms of Rule 16.
C (1). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Government and
Aided Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.
Sr. Type of Institution CAP Seats as % of (Lateral Entry Seats
No + vacant seats)
General Seats Minority Quota
1 All Govt. & Govt. Aided Autonomous
and Non-Autonomous Institution
excluding Minority Educational 100% Nil
Institutions
2 Govt. Aided Autonomous and Non
50% 50%
Autonomous Minority Institutions
3 Government Institutions with Second
30% 70%
shift Courses for Religious Minority
Students ¥
These seats are available for Maharashtra State Candidature Candidates only
¥ - Refer GR TED-2010/(334/2010)/TE-5 Dated 13th September 2011
C (2). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Unaided Private
Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.
Sr. Type of Institution No. of Seats with Competent Authority (CAP Seats)-
No as % of Sanctioned Intake or (Lateral Entry Seats +
Vacant Seats)
General Seats Minority Quota
Unaided Private
Educational Institutions 100% of (Lateral Entry
1 Nil
(excluding minority Seats + Vacant Seats)
Institutions)
Unaided Minority (Lateral Entry Seats +
Minimum 51% of
Educational Institutions Vacant Seats)–Minority
2 (Lateral Entry Seats
Quota
+Vacant Seats)
Page 30 of 34
C(3) Distribution of seats for Admission to Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma
Courses as per eligibility criteria
Sr. No Qualification General Seats Minority Quota
1 HSC Science 25% 25%
2 HSC Science with Technical 25% 25%
3 HSC Science with Vocational 25% 25%
4 SSC with 2 years ITI with appropriate 25% 25%
specialization
Page 31 of 34
Schedule IV
(see rule 6)
(Reservations)
The various reservations provided for the seats excluding Minority Institutions available
under Centralized Admission Process (excluding All India Seats) under the purview of
Competent Authority are detailed here.
1.1 Reservation for Socially, Educationally & Economically Backward Class
Candidates:
The distribution of the seats available under Centralized Admission Process amongst the
various Socially, Educationally & Economically backward class candidates from
Maharashtra State are as per the details given in the table below. Following reservation
shall as per the policy of the Government declared from time to time.
Sr. No Category of reservation % of reservation
1. Scheduled Castes and Schedule caste converts to 13.0
Buddhism ( SC )
2. Schedule Tribes (ST) 7.0
3. De-notified Tribes (DT-A) 3.0
4. Nomadic Tribes ( NT-B) 2.5
5. Nomadic Tribes ( NT-C) 3.5
6. Nomadic Tribes ( NT-D) 2.0
7. Other Backward Classes (OBC) 19.0
8. Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBC) 16.0
Total 66.0
Note:
1. Reservation for backward class candidates i.e. 66% as stated above shall be available
for the seats (excluding All India Seats) under the purview of the Competent Authority
in Government, Government Aided, and Unaided Non-Minority Institutes.
2. If other Backward Class Category seats remain vacant, such seats shall be considered
for allotment to the Candidates of Special Backward Class (SBC) Category limited to
the extent of 2% seats .
3. Admission of Backward Class Candidates on Reserved Seats shall be subject to
verification of his/her Caste/Tribe Certificate.
4. The Backward Class Candidate who got admitted on the reserved seat in First Year or
Direct Second Year shall be required to submit duly filled application to the respective
Caste/Tribe Scrutiny Committee for verification of his/her Caste/Tribe Certificate
within 1 months from the date of his/her admission.
5. If the Backward Class Candidate fails to submit Caste/Tribe Validity Certificate in the
same academic year in which he/she was admitted, he/she shall not be eligible for
admission in next academic year.
1.2 Reservations for Persons with Disability Candidates
Five percent (5%) seats under CAP of all the Institutions shall be reserved for Candidates
with following nature of Disabilities. These seats shall be filled by the Competent Authority
through CAP as per the policy of the Government declared from time to time.
Page 32 of 34
Locomotor disability Low-vision Mental illness
Leprosy cured person Deaf Multiple sclerosis
Cerebral palsy Hard of hearing Parkinson's disease
Dwarfism Speech and language Hemophilia
disability
Muscular dystrophy Intellectual disability Thalassemia
Acid attack victims Specific learning Sickle cell disease
disabilities
Blindness Autism spectrum disorder Multiple Disabilities
1.3 Reservations for Orphan Candidates - One percent (1%) seats of CAP Seats
(excluding Minority institutions, All India Seats, if any) shall be reserved for Orphan
Candidates. These seats shall be filled by the Competent Authority through CAP as
per Government Resolution, Women and Child Welfare Department, No. AMJ-
2011/C.R. 212 / Desk 3 dated 2nd April 2018 and the policies of the Government
declared from time to time.
1.4 Reservation for sons / daughters of Defense Service Personnel - Five per cent (5%)
of the seats available under Centralized admission process in each Polytechnic, subject
to a maximum of five (5) seats, shall be reserved for children of active/Ex defense
service personnel. These seats are within the sanctioned intake capacity for the course.
These seats shall be filled by the Competent Authority through CAP as per the policies
of the Government declared from time to time. This reservation is not available to the
children of civilian staff who is working/ who has worked with the Indian Defense
Services.
1.5 Reservation for female candidates: As per the provisions in Government Resolution
No. GEC-1000/ (123/2000)/ Tech. Edu.-1, dated 17th April, 2000, 30% seats shall be
reserved for female candidates. There shall be no reservation for Female candidates
under Defense, Persons with Disability and Orphan categories.
1.6 Reservation for EWS Candidate: As per the provisions in Government Resolution
No. , dated 1 th February, 2019, 10% seats shall be reserved
राआधो- 4019/(cid:292).(cid:272).31/16-अ 2
for EWS candidates. These seats shall be filled by the Competent Authority through
CAP as per the policies of the Government declared from time to time.
1.7 Documents required to claim reservation for Backward Class candidates and
Tuition Fee Waiver Scheme is given below
Sr. Category Documents required for supporting the Authority issuing the
No backward class reservation claim document.
1. S.C. Caste Certificate stating that the caste Executive Magistrate or
is recognized under backward class appropriate authority in
category in Maharashtra State. Maharashtra State
2. S.T. Tribe Certificate stating that the caste Executive Magistrate or
is recognized under backward class appropriate authority in
category in Maharashtra State. Maharashtra State
3. VJ/DT- Caste/Tribe Certificate stating that the Executive Magistrate or
NT(A) Caste/Tribe is recognized under appropriate authority in
/NT(B)/ backward class category in Maharashtra State or
NT(C)/ Maharashtra State. appropriate authority.
NT(D)/ Non-creamy layer Certificate valid up Sub Divisional Officer /
OBC/ to end of current financial year. Deputy Collector /
SBC/ Collector of the district/
Page 33 of 34
SEBC Metropolitan Magistrate or
appropriate authority
4 Economic Eligibility certificate for Economically Tahsildar/ Sub Divisional
ally Weaker Section . The income limit of Officer / Deputy collector /
Weaker parents shall be as per the Govt. Norms Collector of the district/
Section declared from time to time. Metropolitan Magistrate or
(EWS) appropriate authority.
5 Tuition Annual Income certificate of parents Tahsildar/ Sub Divisional
Fee waiver issued after 1st April of current Officer / Deputy collector /
scheme financial year. The income limit of Collector of the district/
(TFWS) parents shall be as per the AICTE Metropolitan Magistrate or
norms declared from time to time. appropriate authority.
:
Page 34 of 34
